INSPECTION REPORT
Education Provider /
Awarding Body:

Queen Mary University of London (QMUL)

Programme / Award /
Qualification:

Bachelor of Dental Surgery (BDS)

Remit and purpose:

Full inspection referencing the Standards for
Education to determine the continuing
sufficiency of the award for the purpose of
registration with the General Dental Council
(GDC) as a dentist

Learning Outcomes:

The First Five Years

Programme inspection dates:

21 & 22 October 2013

Examination inspection
dates:

19-22 May 2014

Inspection panel:

Alan Kershaw (Chair and Lay Member)
Trevor Burke (Dentist Member)
Daryll Jagger (Dentist Member)
Fizan Tahir (Dentist Member)

GDC staff:

Kathryn Counsell-Hubbard (Lead)
Luke Melia

Outcome:

Recommended that the BDS remains sufficient
for registration as a dentist

1

Inspection summary
The BDS at QMUL is an established programme which has faced a number of challenges in
recent years. The move to the newly developed Dental Hospital of Barts Health NHS Trust
required considerable planning and consultation with staff and students alike, and presented
an obstacle to staff to ensure that the student experience was not compromised. The panel
was impressed by the enthusiasm displayed by students before the change and further
impressed with the flexibility of staff in adapting to the new environment.
The structure of the School of Medicine & Dentistry (SMD) has changed and a new Dean
was appointed for the Institute of Dentistry in August 2013. This change has had a positive
impact on the administration and direction of the programme. The Dean works with excellent
support from the programme leads, who welcomed the inspection as an opportunity to
examine the programme in full and implement changes.
The programme has also had to adapt to internal changes, being the new 2012 curriculum
and adopting the Longitudinal Integrative Foundation Training Undergraduate Postgraduate
Pathway (LIFTUPP) system for clinical recording, feedback and reflection. Both initiatives
have meant significant changes for the programme but have generated excellent feedback
from students.
The panel was impressed with the programme overall and in particular with the support
mechanisms for students. The use of allocated pairs for clinical experience had a positive
impact on the student enjoyment of the programme, and also allowed for continuous peer
review. The ‘open door’ policy adopted by staff was appreciated by students. Electives and
self-selected study modules also contribute to the student experience.
Despite multiple areas of good practice, the inspectors noted some areas where
improvements should be made. Most notably, this includes the quality assurance of outreach
placements and gathering patient feedback. These areas were identified as problematic by
the programme leads and this insight has given the panel some assurance that policies and
procedures will be put into place as required to address the deficiencies.
The inspectors wish to thank the staff, students and external stakeholders involved with the
BDS programme for their co-operation and assistance with the inspection.

Inspection Process and Purpose of Inspection
1.

As part of its duty to protect patients and promote high standards within the professions
it regulates, the General Dental Council (GDC) quality assures the education and
training of student dentists and dental care professionals (DCPs) at institutions whose
qualifications enable the holder to apply for registration with the GDC and new
qualifications where it is intended that the qualification will lead to registration.

2.

The aim of this quality assurance activity is to ensure that these institutions produce a
new registrant who has demonstrated, on graduation, that he or she has met the
outcomes required for registration with the GDC. This is to ensure that students who
obtain a qualification are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner.

3.

The inspection focuses on four Standards, with a total of 29 underlying Requirements.
These are contained in the document Standards for Education.

2

4.

The purpose of this inspection was to make a recommendation to the Council of the
GDC regarding the ‘sufficiency’ of the programme for registration as a dentist in the UK.
The GDC’s powers are derived under Part II, Section 9 of the Dentists Act 1984 (as
amended) to determine sufficiency of the programme.

5.

Inspection reports may highlight areas of strength and draw attention to areas requiring
improvement and development, including actions that are required to be undertaken by
the provider. Where an action is needed for a Requirement to be met, the term ‘must’ is
used to describe the obligation on the provider to undertake this action. For these
actions the inspectors may stipulate a specific timescale by which the action must be
completed or when an update on progress must be provided. In their observations on
the content of the report, the provider should confirm the anticipated date by which
these actions will be completed. Where an action would improve how a Requirement is
met, the term ‘should’ is used and for these actions there will be no due date stipulated.
Providers will be asked to report on the progress in addressing the required actions
through the annual monitoring process. Serious concerns about a lack of progress may
result in further inspections or other quality assurance activity.

6.

The provider of the qualification has the opportunity to provide factual corrections on the
draft report. Following the production of the final report the provider is asked to submit
observations on, or objections to, the report and the actions listed. Where the inspection
panel have recommended that the programme is sufficient for registration, the Council
of the GDC have delegated responsibility to the GDC Registrar to consider the
recommendations of the panel. Should an inspection panel not be able to recommend
sufficiency, the report and observations would be presented to the Council of the GDC
for consideration.

The inspection
7.

This report sets out the findings of an inspection of the BDS awarded by QMUL. The
GDC publication Standards for Education (version 1.0 November 2012) was used as a
framework for the inspection.

8.

The programme inspection took place on 21 and 22 October 2013. During the
inspection, the inspectors met staff involved with the management and delivery of the
BDS programme. The inspection team also met with clinical teaching staff, outreach
tutors, and students on the BDS programme.

9.

On 19 to 21 May 2014 the inspectors attended the practical elements of the final
examination. These were the Case Presentations and the Unseen Case Presentations.

10. The inspectors also attended on 22 May 2014 for the Final Examination Board meeting.

Overview of qualification
11. The five year BDS programme is delivered primarily at the Dental Hospital of Barts
Health NHS Trust. The BDS sits in the Institute of Dentistry (hereafter referred to as the
‘School’) which is part of the School of Medicine & Dentistry (SMD) part of QMUL. Each
cohort is approximately 75 students strong. The programme aims to build up the
knowledge, skills and attitudes required to enter dental practice as a safe beginner. A
particular goal of the new Dean is for the School to be recognised as a world class
institution for research as well as training. A good relationship is enjoyed between the
Institute for Dentistry and the Barts Health NHS Trust where the transparency of
logistical operations has had a direct impact on students by resolving a previously long3

standing issue with instruments. Students experience a range of placements starting in
Year 3, the majority of these being directly under the governance of Barts Health NHS
Trust.
12. The programme is split into three stages over five years, with five main themes running
longitudinally throughout. Placements include dedicated paediatrics clinics and this
combined with the diversity of patients at both the School and outreach means that
students are prepared for a range of patients in whichever sphere of dentistry they
pursue post-graduation.

Evaluation of Qualification against the Standards for Education
13. The provider was requested to undertake a self-evaluation of the programme against
the individual Requirements under the Standards for Education. This involved stating
whether each Requirement was met, partly met or not met and to provide evidence in
support of their evaluation. The inspection panel examined this evidence, requested
further documentary evidence and gathered further evidence from discussions with staff
and students.
14. The inspection panel used the following descriptors to reach a decision on the extent to
which the BDS of QMUL meets each Requirement:
A Requirement is met if:
“There is sufficient appropriate evidence derived from the inspection process. This evidence
provides the inspectors with broad confidence that the provider demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students is supportive of
documentary evidence and the evidence is robust, consistent and not contradictory. There
may be minor deficiencies in the evidence supplied but these are likely to be
inconsequential.”
A Requirement is partly met if:
“Evidence derived from the inspection process is either incomplete or lacks detail and, as
such, fails to convince the inspection panel that the provider fully demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students may not fully
support the evidence submitted or there may be contradictory information in the evidence
provided. There is, however, some evidence of compliance and it is likely that either (a) the
appropriate evidence can be supplied in a short time frame, or, (b) any deficiencies identified
can be addressed and evidenced in the annual monitoring process.”
A Requirement is not met if:
“The provider cannot provide evidence to demonstrate a Requirement or the evidence
provided is not convincing. The information gathered at the inspection through meetings with
staff and students does not support the evidence provided or the evidence is inconsistent
and/or incompatible with other findings. The deficiencies identified are such as to give rise to
serious concern and will require an immediate action plan from the provider. The
consequences of not meeting a Requirement in terms of the overall sufficiency of a
programme will depend upon the compliance of the provider across the range of
Requirements and the possible implications for public protection.

4

Standard 1 – Protecting patients
Providers must be aware of their duty to protect the public. Providers must ensure that
patient safety is paramount and care of patients is of an appropriate standard. Any risk
to the safety of patients and their care by students must be minimised
Requirements
Met
Partly Not
met
met
1. Students will provide patient care only when they have
demonstrated adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical

procedures, the student should be assessed as competent in
the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients
2.

Patients must be made aware that they are being treated by
students and give consent



3.

Students will only provide patient care in an environment
which is safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with
relevant legislation and requirements regarding patient care



4.

When providing patient care and services, students are to be
supervised appropriately according to the activity and the
student’s stage of development.



5.

Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained.
Clinical supervisors must have appropriate general or
specialist registration with a regulatory body



6.

Students and those involved in the delivery of education and
training must be encouraged to raise concerns if they identify
any risks to patient safety



7.

Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be
taken by the provider

8.

Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and
apply as required. The content and significance of the student
fitness to practise procedures must be conveyed to students
and aligned to GDC student fitness to practise guidance. Staff
involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar
with the GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance





GDC comments
Requirement 1: Students will provide patient care only when they have demonstrated
adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical procedures, the student should be assessed
as competent in the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical environments
prior to treating patients (Requirement Met)
Students receive teaching on bio-science before the training in practical skills begins. Patient
safety is taught and underpinned by the environment in the clinical skills lab which reflects
what would be expected if the student were in clinic seeing patients. Requirements for
behaviour and professionalism must be met and are tested in the gateway assessments that
are completed before patient contact.
Gateway assessments take place throughout the first three years of the programme, with
specific clinical assessments during Year Two before the students progress to treating
5

patients. The assessment methods range from Single best answer tests, projects and written
assignments to clinical assessments and case presentations.
The summative assessments are underpinned by formative assessments to ensure that
student behaviour and communication skills are appropriate to allow them to work on clinic.
Working in pairs allows students to develop the ‘softer’ skills while gaining competence and
confidence clinically. Students also have the opportunity to re-take a summative assessment if
they fail in their first attempt.
Requirement 2: Patients must be made aware that they are being treated by students
and give consent (Requirement Met)
The teaching of consent involves simulated scenarios to inform and test students. Patients are
informed that students will deliver their treatment when they first attend an appointment at
either the School or outreach. Consent will be obtained on multiple occasions as the treatment
plan evolves, and students are involved at each stage. Written information on student
treatment is provided to patients and is written to the ‘plain English’ standard. Students are
identifiable by their uniforms and badges to further inform patients.
A specific patient leaflet is utilised for those who participate in the clinical exams. This leaflet
clearly informs patients of what to expect during the process and further contributes to their
awareness and ability to consent to student treatment. Signage was seen in the clinical areas
further informing patients that they may be treated by a student.
Requirement 3: Students will only provide patient care in an environment which is safe
and appropriate. The provider must comply with relevant legislation and requirements
regarding patient care (Requirement Met)
The improved governance position of Barts Health NHS Trust has allowed increased
monitoring to ensure the full complement of instruments is maintained. This has been a serious
issue for the School in recent years but has been resolved for at least one calendar year to
date.
Relevant health and safety policies are held for clinics at the School with the outreach
placements also being at NHS facilities. No current issues or complaints were evidenced either
in the minutes of relevant committees or via meetings with staff and students. There was no
explicit requirement for placements to have been inspected by the Care Quality Commission
(CQC) evidenced in the documentation provided to the panel. The School was preparing for its
own CQC inspection at the time of the GDC’s inspection.
The panel was satisfied that the environments for patient care are safe and appropriate.
Requirement 4: When providing patient care and services, students are to be
supervised appropriately according to the activity and the student’s stage of
development (Requirement Met)
The levels of supervision demonstrated in the documentary evidence were deemed to be
sufficient by the panel. This information was triangulated with students who were satisfied with
the supervision they received. Students also reported that the level of supervision was
continuous at the outreach placements, demonstrating that supervision is sufficient across all
sites.
Requirement 5: Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained. Clinical
supervisors must have appropriate general or specialist registration with a regulatory
body (Requirement Met)
6

All full time academic staff at the School must undertake compulsory training in education, and
it was further reported that many honorary staff will also complete a teaching qualification while
at the School. Teaching skills are further underpinned by regular peer review.
General dental practitioners come into the School prior to supervising on outreach to hone their
skills in the clinical skills laboratory and also to learn what is expected once they start to
supervise.
The panel was confident that clinical supervisors are appropriately qualified and trained. The
GDC registration of clinical supervisors within the School was confirmed by GDC staff.
Requirement 6: Students and those involved in the delivery of education and training
must be encouraged to raise concerns if they identify any risks to patient safety
(Requirement Met)
The programme leads reported that raising concerns is ‘embedded’ within the programme.
This was evidenced by the introduction of the Professionalism, Teamwork, and Social
Responsibility (PTSR) strand within the 2012 curriculum within which ethics and
professionalism is taught from Year 2, prior to patient contact.
The level of support within the School allows students to approach various members of staff
should they need to raise a concern. An ‘open door’ policy has been adopted and this was
evidenced by the confidence the students exhibited when asked about the support they
receive. The mechanisms for raising concerns are included in student-focussed material and
all staff the panel met with appeared to be knowledgeable about, and comfortable with, the
process. The students interviewed were able to demonstrate an understanding of their
obligation to raise a concern if patient safety were at risk.
The embedded nature of raising concerns was further evidenced by a serious incident that was
reported by students, which is detailed under Requirement 7.
Requirement 7: Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be taken by
the provider (Requirement Partly Met)
The serious incident reported by students was fully disclosed to the panel and felt to have been
dealt with quickly and appropriately within the programme’s guidelines. The panel was
therefore confident that any future incidents would be dealt with in the same manner.
The DATIX incident reporting system is in use throughout the clinics, and reports are referred
to the Clinical Director of Dentistry. Such reports are addressed within the Trust’s management
structure and where appropriate are actioned by both the Clinical Director and the Dean.
Monthly governance meetings take place within the Trust to discuss issues and complaints, of
which there were none outstanding at the time of the inspection.
Evidence of a prior ongoing issue with a shortage of instruments was provided and the panel
noted that this has now been resolved. Since greater transparency in Trust procurement
protocols were introduced this issue has not re-arisen. The panel were assured that patient
safety issues are being dealt with appropriately.
However, the policies which define the process for dealing with patient safety issues are those
of the Trust only. The School does not have its own policies in place that reflect the fact that
issues may arise due to student treatment. The policies in use govern all relevant NHS staff,
and it is felt that a School specific, student-centric policy needs to be introduced to underpin
the process. This would make the process comparable with other schools and the
7

Requirement could then be considered to be met.
Requirement 8: Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and apply as
required. The content and significance of the student fitness to practise procedures
must be conveyed to students and aligned to GDC student fitness to practise guidance.
Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar with the GDC Student
Fitness to Practise Guidance (Requirement Met)
The system in place at the time of the inspection was being reviewed with a view to
reorganising the individuals involved with the process. No current student fitness to practise
issues were reported at the time of the inspection. Students are aware of the process which is
documented in the student-focussed handbooks. The principles of the GDC’s guidance are
present within the programme’s policy, which is a School-level policy that then feeds into the
wider QMUL procedures. The panel was pleased to see that the process for dealing with
student fitness to practise issues started at a ‘local’ level where an understanding of the
programme and the need for professionalism is particularly emphasised.
Actions
Req.
Number

7

Actions
The provider must introduce a school-level policy for
dealing with patient safety issues.

Due date
2015 Annual
Monitoring

8

Standard 2 – Quality evaluation and review of the programme
The provider must have in place effective policy and procedures for the monitoring
and review of the programme
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
9. The provider will have a framework in place that details how
it manages the quality of the programme which includes

making appropriate changes to ensure the curriculum
continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and
adapts to changing legislation and external guidance. There
must be a clear statement about where responsibility lies for
this function


10. The provider will have systems in place to quality assure

placements
11. Any problems identified through the operation of the quality

management framework must be addressed as soon as
possible
12. Should quality evaluation of the programme identify any

serious threats to the students achieving learning outcomes
through the programme, the GDC must be notified at the
earliest possible opportunity
13. Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and







external quality assurance procedures
14. External examiners must be utilised and must be familiar

with the learning outcomes and their context. Providers
should follow QAA guidelines on external examining where
applicable
15. Providers must consider and, where appropriate, act upon





concerns raised or formal reports on the quality of education
and assessment
GDC comments
Requirement 9: The provider will have a framework in place that details how it
manages the quality of the programme which includes making appropriate changes to
ensure the curriculum continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and
adapts to changing legislation and external guidance. There must be a clear statement
about where responsibility lies for this function (Requirement Met)
A coherent quality management structure was evidenced with a number of programme-level
committees possessing decision-making capabilities. The Dean is supported by an executive
group who act as a conduit between the SMD and programme staff. The decision-making
capabilities of groups such as the Dental Education Committee (DEC) and the Dental Quality
& Assessment Committee (DQAC) allow the quality of the programme to be managed
effectively because issues can be dealt with quickly. The majority of committees convene
each month, including the DEC which has overarching responsibility for the process.

9

The work of the various committees is informed and driven by the Learning, Teaching &
Assessment Strategy 2010-15 which helps to formalise the processes. There is also effective
student input via the Staff & Student Liaison Committee (SSLC). Students reported that they
felt able to raise concerns and the year representatives are able to communicate with their
entire cohort.
The creation of the 2012 curriculum involved a comprehensive mapping exercise to the
Preparing for Practice learning outcomes. The layout of the new curriculum mirrors the four
areas of the learning outcomes – clinical, management and leadership, professionalism, and
communication – and has allowed the School to introduce areas that they felt to have been
lacking in the previous curriculum. This includes a Global Epidemiology strand as well as the
updated PTSR area.
One area of concern to the inspectors was the lack of recording of responses to reports from
external examiners. Copies of responses were requested during the programme inspection
but could not be located. Responses had not initially been provided to examiners in respect
of reports received at the end of the previous academic year but the response for the current
year was provided at the exam inspection.
However, it was felt that the recording and speed with which the School communicates with
its’ external examiners needs to be reconsidered and developed. The panel did appreciate
that University interaction is required before examiners can be responded to, and recognised
that this can delay responses being collated and sent.
On the basis of the evidence received both prior to and at the inspection, the panel are
assured that a comprehensive structure is in place. The student perception of the quality of
the programme was high and the 2012 curriculum received great praise.
Requirement 10: The provider will have systems in place to quality assure placements
(Requirement Partly Met)
The outreach placements are fully established and have been utilised by the School for a
number of years. All placements received positive feedback from the students interviewed by
the panel. The five placements comprise three nearby community centres, one specialising in
paediatrics, one hospital placement for surgical and A&E experience, and one placement
further afield in Essex. The three community dental placements in London already come
under the auspices of QMUL with staff at the Essex placement receiving honorary contracts
with QMUL soon. The level of formal, contractual interaction with the majority of the outreach
placements give some assurances of informal quality assurance, as the staff at those
placements must perform to the same standard as those within the School itself.
The School were open in their responses in the pre-inspection documentation that systems
are not in place to quality assure placements. There is communication between the Dean and
the leads in outreach but this is not regular or formalised. Some monitoring of outreach takes
place when the modules within the curriculum are evaluated. The completed evaluations are
analysed by the programme leads and the results discussed at DQAC where action points
are identified. Such action points may not be specific for outreach but can still dictate what
should happen at the placements.
However, the maintenance of teaching standards has no formal mechanism and the School
is fortunate that there have not been any serious gaps in the teaching or overall experience at
the placements. Student feedback on the placements is positive, but how any negative
feedback would be utilised and acted upon is unclear.
The panel recognises that the School is planning to recruit an individual who will have
10

oversight of all the outreach placements. There are also plans to appoint clinical leads for all
outreach placements who will work with the Head of Outreach to ensure overall consistency
of all placements. These measures would help the School reach standardisation across all
sites and will help to co-ordinate the training and calibration of outreach teachers. The
opportunity for GDPs to come into the School before they supervise students does already
contribute to calibration and standardisation but more could be done to formalise the
arrangements.
The feedback received on outreach placements, along with the possibility of some quality
assurance through the module evaluations, means that this Requirement can be considered
to be partly met. However, the School must introduce the measures outlined to the panel as a
matter of urgency to ensure that placements continue to offer experience to the required
standard.
Requirement 11: Any problems identified through the operation of the quality
management framework must be addressed as soon as possible (Requirement Met)
The regularity with which committees meet is monthly in most cases, and minutes show a
closure of ‘the loop’ in regards to identification, discussion, and resolution of issues. Serious
issues are discussed at the DEC and can be brought forward as a Chair’s action if needs be.
The process is further underpinned by the Dean sitting on a number of committees so he is
involved at a ‘grass roots’ level and can bring issues to the attention of the School of
Medicine & Dentistry or the University as and when required.
The panel was confident that issues would be identified and addressed in a timely manner
within the quality management framework.
Requirement 12: Should quality evaluation of the programme identify any serious
threats to the students achieving learning outcomes through the programme, the GDC
must be notified at the earliest possible opportunity (Requirement Met)
Clear plans for escalation exist within the quality management framework, meaning that staff
know how and to whom serious threats should be reported. There was a potential threat to
the achievement of learning outcomes due to the move to the new building during the
academic year. The School was aware of the potential difficulties and impact of the move.
The contractors being used were specialised in re-developments of clinical premises and the
timetable for the move was devised to coincide with the Easter break.
Further to this, the School maintained regular and effective communication with the
contractors so that any issues were flagged immediately. It was found upon a tour of the new
facilities that there was ample space for the move of phantom heads into the new building,
and using existing equipment had the advantage of reducing the potential for procurement
logistics to interrupt the move.
However, upon discussion with programme leads, the panel identified that there will be fewer
treatment chairs in the new facility which may impact on students’ clinical experience. The
School stated that the Trust is aware of the School’s student capacity and that plans were still
being refined. Some of the clinical activity may need to be re-housed elsewhere but plans are
ongoing and there was ample time between the programme inspection and the moving dates
for a resolution to be found. There was no update on these plans during the exam inspection.
The School relocated to the new facility in April 2014. While this presented a significant
challenge for staff and students, there was no evidence during the exam inspection (which
took place in May 2014) that the move had adversely affected students and their ability to
learn. It was observed, in fact, that the move had enhanced the student experience
11

particularly in regards to the clinical examinations as the new facility is spacious. Hospital and
programme staff reported that the move had been handled efficiently and with relatively few
disruptions to patients. The panel was able to observe how the increased space allowed for a
smooth administration of the clinical examinations. Further information on the capacity for
clinical activity, however, should be provided to the GDC once the move has been
embedded.
The panel wish to commend the programme leads and staff for their hard work in ensuring
that students were not adversely affected during the move to the new building. Staff should
also be commended for adapting to their new facility with such adeptness as to not
compromise the final exams.
Requirement 13: Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external quality
assurance procedures (Requirement Met)
The programme is subject to periodic review by the University, and dentistry was included in
the last three reviews. The CQC was due to inspect shortly after the GDC’s inspection, and a
mock inspection was taking place at the time of the GDC’s inspection. Internal quality
assurance is regularly undertaken by the DQAC, and this work feeds into the wider work of
the SMD.
Further external quality assurance is provided by the external examiners who review written
exam papers and produce reports on the final clinical exams. A full range of reports from the
different external examiners was presented at the programme inspection. The panel further
observed direct, verbal feedback at the Board of Examiners meeting following the final clinical
assessments.
The contemporaneous response to recent external examiner reports was seen at the exam
inspection. However, the panel wishes to note that historical responses could not be provided
at the programme inspection and the programme leads advised that the responses could not
be located. This undermined the rigour of the external quality assurance because it could not
be determined how stringently feedback from the examiners was considered by the School.
The evidence of the current response does provide assurance for the process now and in
moving forward.
Requirement 14: External examiners must be utilised and must be familiar with the
learning outcomes and their context. Providers should follow Quality Assurance
Agency (QAA) guidelines on external examining where applicable (Requirement Met)
External examiners work within QAA guidelines and do not directly examine students. The
programme has a full complement of external examiners who are all from similar institutions,
and are therefore familiar with the learning outcomes. All appointments are recommended by
the Professor for Dental Education and agreed with Part PIEs prior to gaining approval from
SMD and QMUL committees. The programme leads did acknowledge that there can be
difficulties in recruiting new external examiners but this is not an issue at the present time.
Requirement 15: Providers must consider and, where appropriate, act upon concerns
raised or formal reports on the quality of education and assessment (Requirement
Met)
Reports from external examiners are the most common form of external reporting that the
School receive. A response to the external examiner reports was provided at the exam
inspection but earlier responses could not be found during the programme inspection, and
therefore evidence of such reports being acted upon was lacking. The panel were concerned
that such evidence had not been held centrally and securely
12

However, having seen the response to the current reports, the panel was assured that the
quality assurance ‘loop’ is being closed and that the School is considering formal reports. The
external examiners were able to give further assurance during interview at the exam
inspection by detailing areas of improvement they had previously suggested which were in
evidence at the exams.
Evidence of responses to earlier formal reports would have given complete assurance that
this Requirement had been met. However, the evidence seen in the form of the current
response and the information from the external examiners, does demonstrate the
collaboration between the School and those reporting on a regular basis. The panel
recommends that future responses be stored centrally and securely but consider the
Requirement to be met.
Actions
Req.
Number
9, 13 & 15

10

12

Actions
Responses to external examiner reports must be
recorded effectively and securely. The mechanism for
creating and sending responses needs to be reevaluated to ensure that responses are sent in a timely
manner.
Quality assurance of outreach placements must be
introduced as a matter of urgency. Appropriate staff
should be recruited into roles to have oversight of the
process.
An update on the capacity for clinical activity at the new
hospital, and whether any of this activity has had to be
relocated, should be provided to the GDC.

Due date
2015 Annual
monitoring

2015 Annual
monitoring

2015 Annual
monitoring

13

Standard 3– Student assessment
Assessment must be reliable and valid. The choice of assessment method must be
appropriate to demonstrate achievement of the GDC learning outcomes. Assessors
must be fit to perform the assessment task
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
16. To award the qualification, providers must be assured that
students have demonstrated attainment across the full range

of learning outcomes, at a level sufficient to indicate they are
safe to begin practice. This assurance should be underpinned
by a coherent approach to aggregation and triangulation, as
well as the principles of assessment referred to in these
standards.
17. The provider will have in place management systems to plan,

monitor and record the assessment of students throughout
the programme against each of the learning outcomes
18. Assessment must involve a range of methods appropriate to

the learning outcomes and these should be in line with
current practice and routinely monitored, quality assured and
developed
19. Students will have exposure to an appropriate breadth of





patients/procedures and will undertake each activity relating
to patient care on sufficient occasions to enable them to
develop the skills and the level of competency to achieve the
relevant GDC learning outcomes



20. The provider should seek to improve student performance by



encouraging reflection and by providing feedback.
21. Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills,

experience and training to undertake the task of assessment,
appropriate general or specialist registration with a regulatory
body
22. Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent

to which assessment processes are rigorous, set at the
correct standard, ensure equity of treatment for students and
have been fairly conducted
23. Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear







criteria. Standard setting must be employed for summative
assessments
24. Where appropriate, patient/peer/customer feedback should



contribute to the assessment process
25. Where possible, multiple samples of performance must



be taken to ensure the validity and reliability of the
assessment conclusion
14

26. The standard expected of students in each area to be

assessed must be clear and students and staff involved
in assessment must be aware of this standard



GDC comments
Requirement 16: To award the qualification, providers must be assured that students
have demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes, at a level
sufficient to indicate they are safe to begin practice. This assurance should be
underpinned by a coherent approach to aggregation and triangulation, as well as the
principles of assessment referred to in these standards (Requirement Met)
Student attainment is closely monitored via the use of LIFTUPP and also through a thorough
sign-up process for the final exams. The sign-up process consists of three meetings between
students, the Student Support Manager and senior tutors to discuss performance, check
achievement of the required competencies and to flag any competencies in which a student
may be deficient. The last of the three meetings takes place at the end of March with the finals
commencing in May, meaning that time is still allowed for students to rectify any deficiencies
The use of LIFTUPP allows for triangulation of student attainment and feedback from
supervisors. The panel noted that this system is in use at outreach as well as at the School,
leading to ‘joined up’ working. The data from the previous electronic recording system,
ePortfolio, has been retained and is reviewed alongside the LIFTUPP data. Both systems were
used while LIFTUPP was introduced to ensure that all patient contacts were recorded.
The programme has been fully mapped to the learning outcomes. Blueprinting links the
outcomes to the assessments in each year, meaning that to pass the assessments is to have
achieved the learning outcomes. Tutors check students’ performance in assessments regularly
throughout the programme, including a formal review at progression meetings.
The final exams comprise a written examination, and two practical elements. Students must
present a case and will also undertake a viva on a previously unseen patient whom they have
the opportunity to examine. The written paper, practical exams and continuous assessments
are the four elements that are used to determine a students’ overall mark for the Part 5 BDS
examination and whether they have achieved Distinction, Merit or Pass.
The method for the use of the four elements was clear in the Schools’ documentation and was
adhered to during the Board of Examiners meeting. Each element of the final assessment
process must be passed and there is no compensation between the elements. The panel was
satisfied that School processes were being observed and that the final qualification conclusion
was valid.
The panel did note the concerns of external examiners in that the inclusion of continuous
assessment in the final marks does appear to increase the number of Merit and Distinction
students. However, it was felt that, although the School may wish to consider such feedback
for their own purposes, this does not adversely affect the assessment conclusion: only safe
students are being passed.
Requirement 17: The provider will have in place management systems to plan, monitor
and record the assessment of students throughout the programme against each of the
learning outcomes (Requirement Met)

15

The Student Support Office (SSO) plays a major role in the monitoring of students. The office
has an Assessment & Feedback Officer who collects and records the clinical competency units
and other associated course units completed by students, and logs these. Tutors and students
may review this data at any time. The Assessment & Feedback Officer will also contact
students if they appear to be falling behind so students will be made aware of gaps before end
of year reviews
LIFTUPP also plays a significant role within student monitoring and this system has been rolled
out across all outreach placements. This joined-up working promotes consistency and allows
easier student reflection. The system in place prior to LIFTUPP is no longer used but all the
information has been retained centrally within the SSO.
Regular meetings with students also allow programme staff to monitor student progress
effectively. Mapping has been completed so that unit competencies can be tracked against the
learning outcomes.
Competencies can be formally achieved only once a minimum number of each specified
procedure has been completed. While this ensures a certain amount of exposure, the lack of
actual numbers to indicate how many times a student has undertaken a certain procedure
means that their individual experience is not monitored. Such monitoring may be useful in the
future to identify areas of difficulty and gain a broader picture of the student experience. The
programme leads stated at the exam inspection that it would be possible to gather such
numbers from LIFTUPP but this is not routinely collated.
Requirement 18: Assessment must involve a range of methods appropriate to the
learning outcomes and these should be in line with current practice and routinely
monitored, quality assured and developed (Requirement Met)
The assessment methods have been recently evaluated in line with the exercise to introduce
the 2012 curriculum. The range appeared to be effective and wide-ranging. Assessments are
discussed at the DQAC and issues can then be referred to DEC for changes to be agreed if
required. When asked by the panel, students were satisfied with the assessment methods.
The panel was impressed by the extensive blueprinting that shows the assessment process in
detail. Having reviewed such blueprints and observed the final clinical examinations, the panel
was satisfied that the range of assessment methods employed were appropriate.
Requirement 19: Students will have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and will undertake each activity relating to patient care on
sufficient occasions to enable them to develop the skills and the level of competency to
achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes (Requirement Met)
The programme has a consultant who is in charge of patients. Students may feed back to the
consultant if they are lacking in a particular patient type, allowing for that gap to be filled and
patients reallocated effectively.
The patient variations in each outreach placement allows for an appropriate breadth of
exposure for the students. The patient mix at the School is extremely varied due to its’ central
London location. Steele’s Lane placement gives concentrated paediatric experience and
Southend gives a more continuous patient experience with longitudinal care. Every patient
contact is logged on LIFTUPP with competencies being signed off in hard copy and collated at
the School.
A review of student progression is completed early in Year 5 so that students who have a
deficit then have the opportunity to achieve any missing competencies. If the student is still
16

lacking closer to the final exams then deadlines will be set. Missing competencies may not
impede a student from completing their finals but will mean that they are not signed off at the
end of the programme and therefore would not be able to apply for registration with the GDC.
Upon review at the exam inspection, it was seen that all final year students have achieved the
requisite competencies in order to be awarded the BDS qualification.
Requirement 20: The provider should seek to improve student performance by
encouraging reflection and by providing feedback (Requirement Met)
LIFTUPP has played a large part in making the reflection process easier as students may
reflect immediately after a patient contact. Unit competency forms will not be accepted by SSO
if the student reflection section has not been completed.
The supervisor provides feedback on LIFTUPP also and students like the immediacy of the
system. Further formal feedback is provided after assessments. The SSLC allows for formal
student feedback on the programme.
Students reported to the panel that they were happy with the level of feedback they receive
and the amount of reflection they are required to do. The School allocates all students into
pairs when they commence the programme for clinical skills training and practice. This allows
for additional peer feedback to be given informally between students, providing further
opportunity to improve student performance. The fact that students are paired also means that
students are required to work together, providing an introduction to the team working they will
encounter in their future professional lives. In this way the ability to give constructive critique is
also taught.
Requirement 21: Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills, experience and
training to undertake the task of assessment, appropriate general or specialist
registration with a regulatory body (Requirement Met)
Training for internal examiners and assessors appeared to be comprehensive. There are
several opportunities for academic staff to undertake further training and there is specialist
training for the Principal Internal Examiners (PIEs) and the Senior Internal Examiners (SIEs).
The majority of examiners observed during the final clinical examinations marked to a similar
standard and were confident in their role. The panel observed some disparity in the individual
marks awarded, which suggests that further calibration is required. The examiners who found
themselves in that situation were able to collaborate and agree a joint mark, sometimes after
starting with a wide disparity. Newer examiners were able to observe some of the exams
themselves in order to further their learning.
The outreach placements will soon come under the QMUL ‘umbrella’, meaning that the same
training requirements will be applied to assessors outside the School. However, it is not clear
whether such training has taken place yet. Introducing a Head of Outreach, as intended by the
School, is one measure by which the training of outreach staff should be assured.
The panel did note, however, that there were no reported issues with the consistency of
assessment across sites from either staff, outreach supervisors or students. The panel
therefore feel that the Requirement is met although further action would improve and reinforce
the ability for all assessors to mark consistently. Comprehensive monitoring of marks from
across outreach and increased opportunities for calibration may be useful.
Requirement 22: Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent to which
assessment processes are rigorous, set at the correct standard, ensure equity of
treatment for students and have been fairly conducted (Requirement Met)
17

External examiners review written examination papers and observe the final clinical exams.
The external examiners do not mark or participate in the clinical exams but observe both the
student and the discussion afterwards between the internal examiners to ensure that students
are being marked accurately and consistently.
Following the clinical exams, the external examiners provide an oral report on their
observations at the Board of Examiners meeting. These observations are minuted and the
examiners also provide a written report setting down the changes they would like to see in
future years.
Requirement 23: Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear criteria.
Standard setting must be employed for summative assessments (Requirement Met)
The assessment strategy for the programme was clearly demonstrated in blueprints,
handbooks, and policy documentation. The Angoff Standard Setting method is utilised for the
2012 curriculum. The processes for standard setting, while present, are still being embedded
but there is opportunity for staff to be trained in assessment criteria during development days
and training with the module conveners.
Examiners have the opportunity to calibrate before the exams and the PIE holds a briefing on
each day of the clinical exams. The briefing covers the format and structure of the exams, how
the mark sheets work and also a list of structured questions to aid the examiners in achieving
consistency across all candidates. While the panel observed that some of the structured
questions were not relevant in every exam, the majority appeared to aid examiners and ensure
that students were asked similar questions throughout.
The mark sheets utilised included descriptors for the grade scale and the overall mark was
achieved via an accumulation of agreed marks. The use of cumulative marks and clear grade
descriptors further help to achieve fairness in the assessments.
Analysis of the student results is undertaken prior to the Board of Examiners meeting and the
method for assuring the validity of these is explained at the meeting itself. Marks are doublechecked so that staff were assured that marks had not been inappropriately rounded up or
down by the formatting of the results spreadsheet. Fairness and adherence to assessment
criteria is considered at many stages, and with the standard-setting methodology, the
Requirement is considered to have been met.
Requirement 24: Where appropriate, patient/peer/customer feedback should contribute
to the assessment process (Requirement Partly Met)
Peer feedback is possible via the pairing of students through a large portion of the programme.
Patient feedback has not been introduced yet and the programme leads will consider how best
to implement this now that the move into the new hospital facility has been achieved. The
programme leads are going to consider whether LIFTUPP may play a role in obtaining and
capturing patient feedback.
It was observed during the case presentation exams that patients were keen to convey their
thoughts on their treatment by the student to the examiners. Some patients are clearly keen to
provide feedback and the School may wish to capitalise on this.
In the absence of patient feedback, the Requirement can only be considered to be partly met.
The programme leads should consider and implement a method for capturing feedback at the
earliest opportunity. The use of such feedback within the assessment process must be fully
explored and formalised into policy.
18

Requirement 25: Where possible, multiple samples of performance must be taken to
ensure the validity and reliability of the assessment conclusion (Requirement Met)
LIFTUPP is the tool with which the School can analyse individual student performance in
conjunction with summative assessment data. The performance of all students is reviewed as
part of the sign-up process for the final exams in Year 5. The Assessment & Feedback Officer
in the SSO is responsible for ensuring that assessment data is correct and up to date.
Prior to the final exams, student performance is examined at the Student Progress Review at
the end of each academic year. This allows for a review of formative as well as summative
data.
The panel was satisfied that the assessment conclusion is reliable and valid due to the
processes throughout the programme that allow for full student review.
Requirement 26: The standard expected of students in each area to be assessed must
be clear and students and staff involved in assessment must be aware of this standard
(Requirement Met)
The standards for the programme are clearly communicated to students in various handbooks.
Each Year has a joining or a re-joining handbook, and attention is further drawn to relevant
information during teaching sessions. New students complete a formal induction week which
alerts them to the expected standard. In interviews with the panel, students reported that they
understood what was expected from them.
Staff also have handbooks as a source of policy information as well as development days
where student assessment is discussed. Exam preparation focuses on the credit levels of the
programme which serves to inform and also remind staff of the required standard.
During the final exams, the panel observed that all staff and students appeared to be familiar
with the exam process. Examiners showed a clear understanding of the level expected of
students and were confident in using the marking criteria. The panel was satisfied that the
Requirement had been met.
Actions
Req.
Number
24

Actions
The programme leads must implement a method by
which patient feedback can be recorded. A policy
must then be created and instituted as to how the
feedback will contribute to the assessment process.

Due date
2015 Annual
monitoring

19

Standard 4 – Equality and diversity
The provider must comply with equal opportunities and discrimination legislation and
practice. They must also advocate this practice to students
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
27. Providers must adhere to current legislation and best practice

guidance relating to equality and diversity
28. Staff will receive training on equality and diversity,

development and appraisal mechanisms will include this
29. Providers will convey to students the importance of

compliance with equality and diversity law and principles both
during training and after they begin practice






GDC comments
Requirement 27: Providers must adhere to current legislation and best practice
guidance relating to equality and diversity (Requirement Met)
Equality and diversity policies exist within the School and on outreach. Both QMUL and NHS
policies exist in all locations. The enthusiasm for, and commitment to, the principles of equality
and diversity were evident from meeting with programme staff and the panel was satisfied that
legislation and best practice guidance are being followed.
Requirement 28: Staff will receive training on equality and diversity, development and
appraisal mechanisms will include this (Requirement Met)
All staff are under the mandatory requirement to complete QMUL training and completion is
recorded. Those with NHS contracts will also complete Trust training. Staff at Southend will be
given honorary contracts with QMUL, as staff at the other outreach placements already have.
All staff on outreach will therefore be subject to the mandatory training requirements of QMUL
as well.
Requirement 29: Providers will convey to students the importance of compliance with
equality and diversity law and principles both during training and after they begin
practice (Requirement Met)
While the formal terminology of “equality and diversity” was not clearly understood by all the
students interviewed by the panel, the need for professionalism and to abandon any form of
prejudice while with patients was clearly articulated by all the student groups. There was a
good understanding of ethics. Equality and diversity was shown by the documentary evidence
to be interwoven throughout the PTSR strand. The potential differences in governing legislation
between the four UK nations are addressed in the course that prepares students for vocational
training.
Actions
Req.
Number

Actions

Due date

N/A

20

Summary of Actions
Req.

Actions

Number
7
9, 13 & 15

10

12

24

Observations

Due date

Response from Provider
The provider must introduce a school-level policy
for dealing with patient safety issues.
Responses to external examiner reports must be
recorded effectively and securely. The mechanism
for creating and sending responses needs to be
re-evaluated to ensure that responses are sent in
a timely manner.
Quality assurance of outreach placements must
be introduced. Appropriate staff should be
recruited into roles to have oversight of the
process.
An update on the capacity for clinical activity at
the new hospital, and whether any of this activity
has had to be relocated, should be provided to the
GDC.
The programme leads must implement a method
by which patient feedback can be recorded. A
policy must then be created and instituted as to
how the feedback will contribute to the
assessment process.

2015 Annual
Monitoring
2015 Annual
Monitoring

2015 Annual
Monitoring

2015 Annual
Monitoring

2015 Annual
Monitoring

Observations from the provider on the content of the report
We very much appreciate the efforts of the inspection team during their visits to the Institute of Dentistry at Barts and The London QMUL and
for this report. We feel the content and recommendations of this report are entirely fair and reasonable. We are confident that we will be able to
address all of the recommendations before the 2015 Annual Monitoring.

21

Recommendation to the GDC
The inspectors recommend that this qualification is sufficient for holders to apply for registration as a dentist with the General Dental Council.

22

