INSPECTION REPORT
EDUCATION PROVIDER:

University of Birmingham

PROGRAMME/AWARD:

Bachelor of Dental Surgery (BDS)

REMIT AND PURPOSE:

Full inspection referencing the Standards for
Education to determine the continuing
sufficiency of the award for the purpose of
registration with the GDC as a dentist

LEARNING OUTCOMES:

The First Five Years

PROGRAMME INSPECTION
DATES:

3 & 4 February 2014

EXAMINATION INSPECTION
DATES:

2 & 3 June 2014

INSPECTION PANEL:

Gail Mortimer (Chair)
Alan Gilmour
Fizan Tahir
Samuel Cadden

GDC STAFF:

Ross Scales (Lead)
Krutika Patel

OUTCOME:

Recommended that the University of
Birmingham BDS Programme continues to be
sufficient for registration as a dentist

Inspection Summary
The inspection panel noted that there was a strong team approach within the Dental School
and the BDS programme was supported by an experienced and committed staff team. The
students were engaged and professional, with a good understanding of the expectations
placed upon them.
The programme leaders told the inspectors that they wanted the programme to be inspected
as it stood, rather than what they thought the GDC expected it to be and stated that they
would be open to suggestions for future change in the GDC report. The inspectors felt this
was a refreshing and honest approach.
The inspectors found that patient safety was assured with good supervision arrangements
and robust pre-clinical training and assessment in place. However, it was apparent that
attention should be given to the quality evaluation and review systems for the programme to
ensure that the maximum benefit is gained from the various internal and external
mechanisms in place, including internal reviews and the use of external examiners.
It was very clear to the panel that the area of the BDS programme that required the greatest
level of attention is assessment. The School must prioritise the improvement and
modernisation of the assessments used, alongside the introduction of standard setting for
summative assessments which was notably absent from the final examinations. The
inspectors agreed that all final assessments need to be reviewed and modernised as a
priority and suggest that the School appoints someone with expertise in modern assessment
methods to lead on this important area. The School may wish to consider seeking advice
outside the University if it is not available internally.
All of the external examiners for the final assessment are utilised in a role that requires them
to spend the majority of their time assessing students directly. Whilst this is not prohibited by
GDC requirements, it does prevent these external individuals gaining an oversight of the
various elements of the assessment process, which is contrary to guidance provided by the
Quality Assurance Agency (QAA). The inspectors agreed that the external examiners should
be able to fulfil a quality assurance role, which should include taking a wider view of the
various elements of the final assessments, including sign-up criteria. Their remit should
include the summative element of the continuous clinical assessments, identifying
discrepancies between examining groups and the performance of all elements of the final
assessment process.
The School is introducing the electronic Clinical Assessment and Feedback System (CAFS)
which the inspectors agreed is an important development for the BDS programme. Based on
the demonstration of this system and the feedback provided by the staff and students who
use it, the panel agreed that it was a suitable system for the required tasks and felt that the
strong commitment to its development and effective use should make it a success. This was
important as, at the time of the inspection, the inspectors found that there were various
approaches to the monitoring of clinical experience, with different departments having their
own systems and rules. The inspectors agreed that the School needed to monitor
experience more closely and seek greater consistency with the introduction of CAFS.
A primary reason for the need to closely monitor student activity is that the amount of clinical
experience gained by students is lower than expected in some areas, particularly the
experience with paediatric patients. The inspectors were concerned that these issues may
be exacerbated with a move to new Dental Hospital and School premises outside the City
Centre. The School is aware of these risks, however, there were no plans to mitigate them
presented to the inspectors. To address the issues with clinical experience, the School is
advised to consider expanding the outreach arrangements for students. The inspectors
recognised that there may be issues out of the School’s control, but urge all parties to work
together to address this.

It was apparent to the inspectors that the programme relied heavily on a few individuals and
there should be thought given to succession planning. The inspectors recognised that the
staff team were hard-working and the Birmingham students benefitted from a very good level
of personal and professional support from staff across the programme. This was highlighted
in the feedback received from students across the cohorts who clearly trusted the staff and
were confident to raise any concerns with them.

Inspection Process and Purpose of Inspection
1.

As part of its duty to protect patients and promote high standards within the professions
it regulates, the General Dental Council (GDC) quality assures the education and
training of student dentists and dental care professionals (DCPs) at institutions whose
qualifications enable the holder to apply for registration with the GDC and new
qualifications where it is intended that the qualification will lead to registration.

2.

The aim of this quality assurance activity is to ensure that these institutions produce a
new registrant who has demonstrated, on graduation, that he or she has met the
outcomes required for registration with the GDC. This is to ensure that students who
obtain a qualification are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner.

3.

The inspection focuses on four Standards, with a total of 29 underlying Requirements.
These are contained in the document Standards for Education

4.

The purpose of this inspection was to make a recommendation to the Council of the
GDC regarding the ‘sufficiency’ of the programme for registration as a dentist in the UK.
The GDC’s powers are derived under Part II, Section 9 of the Dentists Act 1984 (as
amended) to determine sufficiency of the programme. The inspectors may also list a
number of actions for the provider to undertake. Where an action is needed for a
Requirement to be met, the term ‘must’ is used to describe the obligation on the provider
to undertake this action. Where an action would improve how a Requirement is met, the
term ‘should’ is used.

5.

The provider of the qualification has the opportunity to provide factual corrections on the
draft report. Following the production of the final report the provider is asked to submit
observations on, or objections to, the report and the actions listed. Where the inspection
panel have recommended that the programme is sufficient for registration, the Council
of the GDC have delegated responsibility to the GDC Registrar to consider the
recommendations of the panel. Should an inspection panel not be able to recommend
sufficiency, the report and observations would be presented to the Council of the GDC
for consideration.

The Inspection
6.

This report sets out the findings of an inspection of the Bachelor of Dental Surgery
awarded by the University of Birmingham. The GDC publication ‘Standards for
Education (version 1.0 November 2012)’ was used as a framework for the inspection.
Inspection reports may highlight areas of strength and draw attention to areas requiring
improvement and development, including actions that are required to be undertaken by
the provider.

7.

The report contains the findings of the inspection panel across two visits and with
consideration to supporting documentation prepared by the School of Dentistry to
evidence how the individual Requirements under the Standards for Education have
been met. This inspection forms part of a series BDS inspections being undertaken by
the GDC 2012-2014.

8.

The inspection was comprised of two visits. The first, referred to as the programme
inspection, was carried out on 3 and 4 February 2014. This involved a series of
meetings with programme staff involved in the management, delivery and assessment
of the programme and a selection of BDS students. The second visit took place between
4 and 6 June and is referred to as the examination/student sign-off inspection.

Brief Overview of Qualification
9.

The BDS programme sits within the School of Dentistry of the University of Birmingham.
The programme has an annual intake of between 75 and 80 students. The duration of
the programme is 193 weeks over five years of study and training. The University also
awards a Bachelor of Science in Dental Hygiene and Dental Therapy.

10. Students spend the first year of the programme based on the main University of
Birmingham campus, with some time spent at the Dental Hospital and School observing
clinics and becoming familiar with the dental environment. The first year modules and
assessments are designed and delivered in collaboration with the medical school. The
time spent at the Dental Hospital and School increases in the second year, where the
student begins to assist on clinic, and much of what they have learnt is applied to
dentistry. A key stage of this transition is ‘Term 6’ where students undertake more work
in the clinical skills laboratory and which can be considered as a gateway to
commencing clinical practice. At the end of this term students take gateway exams in a
number of areas including decontamination, infection control and practical ability.
11. If the gateway assessments are passed, the student commences clinical work on
patients from the beginning of Year Three. The focus in clinical practice at Birmingham
is on whole patient care throughout a student’s training. New subjects and skills are
introduced and existing subjects are built on as the student moves through the clinical
years of the programme. Students attend specialist oral surgery clinics from Year Three
until the end of Year Five. In Year Three, students begin to gain experience across a
number of specialty clinics.
12. Students will undertake a minimum of six adult and six paediatric outreach sessions in
the final two years of the programme. In the final year there is a focus on general dental
practice and whole patient care sessions within the Dental Hospital and School clinics.
Students also have the opportunity to take special study modules if they have a
particular interest in an area, or if they require further training in that area.
13. Students are subject to continuous clinical assessment. The records of this assessment
are held by the student and collected each term. In future, the development of the
electronic Clinical Assessment and Feedback System (CAFS) will supersede this.
Should students have gained less experience than expected by the January in the final
year, they receive a letter informing them of their outstanding requirements.
14. Although the programme follows a traditional structure of a dental programme, the
University has required a modular structure to be introduced. The School seems to have
managed this transition well with strand modules across years including a large

overarching clinical module; however at times it made the documentation confusing for
the inspectors to follow.
15. The programme had been designed to meet the learning outcomes in GDC’s previous
curriculum document, The First Five Years. However, from 2015/16 graduates of the
programme will meet the learning outcomes contained in Preparing for Practice, which
was published in late 2011.

Evaluation of Qualification against the ‘Standards for Education’
16. The ‘Standards for Education’ were used as a framework for this inspection. The
provider was requested to undertake a self-evaluation of the programme against the
individual Requirements under the Standards for Education. This involved stating
whether each Requirement is met, partly met or not met and to provide evidence in
support of their evaluation. The inspection panel examined this evidence, requested
further documentary evidence and gathered further evidence from discussions with staff
and students.
17. The inspection panel used the following descriptors to reach a decision on the extent to
which the BDS of the University of Birmingham meets each Requirement:
A Requirement is met if:
“There is sufficient appropriate evidence derived from the inspection process. This evidence
provides the inspectors with broad confidence that the provider demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students is supportive of
documentary evidence and the evidence is robust, consistent and not contradictory. There
may be minor deficiencies in the evidence supplied but these are likely to be
inconsequential.”
A Requirement is partly met if:
“Evidence derived from the inspection process is either incomplete or lacks detail and, as
such, fails to convince the inspection panel that the provider fully demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students may not fully
support the evidence submitted or there may be contradictory information in the evidence
provided. There is, however, some evidence of compliance and it is likely that either (a) the
appropriate evidence can be supplied in a short time frame, or, (b) any deficiencies identified
can be addressed and evidenced in the annual monitoring process.”
A Requirement is not met if:
“The provider cannot provide evidence to demonstrate a Requirement or the evidence
provided is not convincing. The information gathered at the inspection through meetings with
staff and students does not support the evidence provided or the evidence is inconsistent
and/or incompatible with other findings. The deficiencies identified are such as to give rise to
serious concern and will require an immediate action plan from the provider. The
consequences of not meeting a Requirement in terms of the overall sufficiency of a
programme will depend upon the compliance of the provider across the range of
Requirements and the possible implications for public protection.

Standard 1 – Protecting patients
Providers must be aware of their duty to protect the public. Providers must ensure that
patient safety is paramount and care of patients is of an appropriate standard. Any risk
to the safety of patients and their care by students must be minimised
Met
Partly Not met
Requirements
met

1. Students will provide patient care only when they have
demonstrated adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical
procedures, the student should be assessed as competent in
the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients
2. Patients must be made aware that they are being treated by
students and give consent
3. Students will only provide patient care in an environment
which is safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with
relevant legislation and requirements regarding patient care
4. When providing patient care and services, students are to be
supervised appropriately according to the activity and the
student’s stage of development.
5. Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained.
Clinical supervisors must have appropriate general or
specialist registration with a regulatory body
6. Students and those involved in the delivery of education and
training must be encouraged to raise concerns if they identify
any risks to patient safety
7. Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be
taken by the provider
8. Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and
apply as required. The content and significance of the student
fitness to practise procedures must be conveyed to students
and aligned to GDC student fitness to practise guidance. Staff
involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar
with the GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance.
GDC comments
Requirement 1: Students will provide patient care only when they have demonstrated
adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical procedures, the student should be
assessed as competent in the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients (Requirement Met)
Students on the Birmingham BDS programme commence the direct clinical treatment of
patients in Year 3 of the programme. Throughout the preceding years students are taught in
the classroom and the clinical skills laboratory and observe and assist in a clinical
environment. The students are required to pass a range of knowledge and skills based
‘gateway’ assessments in the classroom and pre-clinical environment in preparation for clinical
practice. The inspectors were provided with a list of the various assessments used and noted
that the methods of assessment utilised included multiple-choice and short answer questions.

These were in addition to observed competency assessments in the clinical skills laboratory,
including assessments in cavity preparation and restoration, crown preparation, extraction and
oral hygiene. ‘Gateway’ assessments that must be passed also included decontamination,
infection control and medical emergencies. The inspectors noted that these assessments
occurred at the appropriate stage within the programme.
The inspectors were informed that if a student does not pass an assessment, they are given
additional support and training. The students may also seek additional time in the clinical skills
laboratory to hone their skills after they have commenced work on patient clinics.
The inspectors noted that medical emergency training occurs in each year of the programme
and that in each year there is an emphasis on a particular aspect that has a relationship with
the stage of training that the student is undertaking. This medical emergency training is
delivered by an external company.
Following interviews with groups of students from each year of the programme, the inspectors
agreed that it was clear the students knew the importance of acting within their own limits and
would not hesitate to ask for assistance if it was required. The students told the inspectors that
they felt they were safe when they first treated patients as they were well prepared when
taking this step, having undertaken a good amount of preparatory work prior to this stage and
they also benefitted from a good level of supervision. The inspectors were further assured
about patient safety as the students were able to practise on extracted teeth in the skills
laboratory before treating patients. The students reported that they felt the use of extracted
teeth was very useful in their preparation for treating patients.
Based on the evidence received, the inspectors agreed that this Requirement was Met.
Requirement 2: Patients must be made aware that they are being treated by students
and give consent (Requirement Met)
A ‘welcome leaflet’ is provided to all patients referred from outside the Dental Hospital and
School. The inspectors agreed that this leaflet clearly explained to the patient that they were in
a teaching hospital and that the treatment they receive may be provided by a student. The
inspectors noted that additional information leaflets provided to patients explained the
implications of treatment by students, including the time and costs involved, which was felt to
be good practice. Staff and students at the Dental Hospital and School are distinguishable by
the different coloured uniforms they wear in the majority of clinics and students wear badges
which identify them as students.
Staff told the inspectors that students are taught from an early stage that patients must
provide valid consent to treatment by a student and that this consent should be recorded. This
consent is gained verbally and is recorded in the patient notes and countersigned by a
supervising clinician for the majority of procedures. In addition, for some procedures written
consent is required. During a meeting with staff, it was commented by staff that best practice
would be for consent to be recorded in the notes. The panel agreed that this should be viewed
as the minimum expectation when recording consent rather than considered best practice.
Interviews with the students supported the information provided in the documentation and in
the interviews with school staff. The students explained to the panel how consent was
obtained, how it was recorded and how the patients were aware that they were to be treated
by a student. The panel was reassured by the students’ awareness of the importance of
keeping patients informed regularly about their course of treatment.
The inspectors agreed that this Requirement was Met.

Requirement 3: Students will only provide patient care in an environment which is safe
and appropriate. The provider must comply with relevant legislation and requirements
regarding patient care (Requirement Met)
The vast majority of patient care undertaken by BDS students is delivered within student clinics
at the dental hospital or in other clinics throughout the hospital, where Birmingham Community
Healthcare NHS Trust (BCHC) is the responsible organisation. The inspectors were provided
with a range of evidence that supported the School’s assertion that this requirement was met.
This evidence included Care Quality Commission reports, risk assessments, insurance and
indemnity details and the most recent internal safety report.
Although the majority of clinical treatment takes place in BCHC premises, some of the
outreach placements fall under the responsibility of other trusts. Since 2012, the Director of
Education undertakes visits to outreach placements alongside a member of staff from the
College Quality Office. The inspectors were pleased to note that these visits have recently
been formalised and each placement is visited once per year. A report is produced following
each visit and the inspectors were provided with a range of visit reports. This is discussed
further under Requirement 10.
Final year students told the inspectors that they are provided with 1:1 dental nursing support in
outreach most of the time, which the inspectors agreed would help to ensure patient safety
when students treat patients in outreach locations.
The inspectors determined that this Requirement was Met.
Requirement 4: When providing patient care and services, students are to be
supervised appropriately according to the activity and the student’s stage of
development (Requirement Met)
The School provided the inspectors with details of the supervision ratios across the various
clinical locations where students worked clinically. During the programme inspection the
inspectors were also able to view copies of clinical timetables which included names of
supervisors at each session.
It was explained that the individual or individuals supervising and the supervision level varied
according to the tasks the students were undertaking and the student’s level of experience.
Further to this, the teaching and clinical experience of supervisors was considered when
compiling the timetable to achieve an appropriate balance for supervision of student clinics.
Senior school staff also explained that mechanisms were in place to address staff absences,
with members of staff in reserve for each session who could be available to undertake
supervision duties if needed. In addition, at a number of clinics qualified dental nurses work
with the students and their role in assisting with the supervision of students was rightly
highlighted by the School.
The students informed the inspectors that supervision levels in specialty areas ranges between
one member of staff to three students and one member of staff to six students. In the GDP
clinics it is normally four members of staff for up to 25 students, which was in line with the
School’s stated ratios. The students told the panel that they felt that the levels of supervision
were appropriate and that they never waited for more than five minutes to see a supervisor.
The inspectors were also assured that the supervision levels in outreach were of a satisfactory
level.
The inspectors found that students were supervised appropriately and that this Requirement

was Met.
Requirement 5: Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained. Clinical
supervisors must have appropriate general or specialist registration with a regulatory
body (Requirement Met)
The School confirmed to the inspectors that every individual who supervises students working
clinically holds general and/or specialist registration with the relevant professional regulatory
body. The inspectors were able to verify this by viewing the staff records and the supervision
timetables that were available to the panel during the programme inspection.
The inspectors were provided with an overview of the induction process for new staff, which
included central University and Trust inductions. New staff also receive an individual induction
for their specific role. All new full-time teaching staff are required to complete a teaching
qualification, if they do not hold one at appointment. In addition, the panel was informed that
several members of staff either hold or are studying for higher level teaching and research
qualifications. It was stated by senior staff that all staff at the School are encouraged and
supported to undertake further study.
The inspectors were told by the programme leads that all staff, including part-time and
outreach staff receive appropriate training for their roles. New outreach trainers attend hospital
clinics where they shadow experienced supervisors and after this are supervised when they
first teach and supervise students. The School holds an annual outreach teachers’ day each
summer, though the inspectors noted that attendance is encouraged but not compulsory. Staff
that do not attend this event are encouraged to undertake relevant reading related to the
training though this is not mandatory. In addition, the panel was told that a number of outreach
and other part-time staff have gained supervisory and/or assessment experience from other
roles such as being a foundation trainer or an examiner for the GDC’s Overseas Registration
Examination.
The inspectors were briefed about the peer observation process, which was a recently
introduced innovation. This process involves all clinical staff who have been in post for at least
two years receiving peer observation and feedback on their teaching. A sample of completed
peer observation forms was available to the inspectors. The inspectors agreed that this was a
positive development.
All staff are subject to personal development reviews, which the School felt were helpful in
identifying areas for development. However, it was acknowledged that the format of these
reviews was limited for part-time staff.
It was agreed that the training and development of part-time and outreach staff could be
strengthened, however, from the evidence provided the inspectors agreed that this
Requirement was Met.
Requirement 6: Students and those involved in the delivery of education and training
must be encouraged to raise concerns if they identify any risks to patient safety
(Requirement Met)
Senior staff explained to the inspectors that the importance of raising concerns and the
requirement to do so is integrated into the teaching programme from the start. The ‘Healthcare
Ethics and Law’ module in Year 1 incorporates whistle-blowing principles and raising issues of
poor performance.

When questioned by the panel, it was apparent that the students were aware of their duty to
raise concerns where they were aware of risks to patient safety. Some students told the
inspectors this was a professional duty and others indicated that it was a legal duty, but all
student groups were clear about the requirement to take action where there are issues that
could lead to patient harm. In addition, there was a common view from students that it was
important to address a problem or risk before it became a greater concern.
The process by which a student or member of the wider dental team could raise a concern was
verbally outlined to the panel. Although the inspectors were provided with convincing
responses from both staff and students regarding how a patient safety concern would be
reported, the inspectors noted that there was no specific process or guidance document that
outlined the steps to be taken and provided those raising concerns assurance about the
protection they would be offered. Students told the inspectors that they were confident that
they would be listened to and not penalised if they raised a concern, which was reassuring.
The School of Dentistry’s draft response to the Francis Report was provided in advance of the
examination inspection. This document was evidently well thought through, with a clear
discussion of the issues and a number of actions planned. The document was wide-ranging
and highlighted how the findings of the Francis Report would affect the training of students.
The inspectors were told that specific teaching on the issues raised in the report would be
introduced from the first year of the programme and would be integrated into the online ‘ecourse’ for students to access. The inspectors were informed that the contents of the action
plan and the flow chart for raising concerns from this report have been incorporated into the
draft quality manual, which would directly address the findings of the Francis Report. The
inspectors were told that there is an intention to develop a School whistleblowing policy in the
near future, which will run alongside the NHS policy.
The inspectors agreed that the approach of the staff and the students provided the evidence
that this Requirement was Met and that this area will be greatly strengthened when the
planned future developments come into effect.
Requirement 7: Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be taken by
the provider (Requirement Partly Met)
An electronic ‘DATIX’ incident reporting system is in operation at Birmingham. This system is
operated by the Trust, but jointly owned with the School. The staff that had responsibility for
ensuring patient safety confirmed that any clinical incident, patient safety issue or near miss is
reported on the DATIX system, which feeds into the Trust risk register. The inspectors were
able to review a sample of clinical incidents reported on this system during the programme
inspection.
The Governance Manager of the Trust reviews all reported incidents and is responsible for
alerting appropriate people and undertaking investigations with the relevant managers. The
inspectors were told that there is an emphasis on looking for lessons learned in the evaluation
of reports and identifying repeat incidents. In addition, certain incidents will lead to action for
individuals involved in the incident. It was also helpful to learn that the Trust had instigated
patient safety walkabout sessions to try and prevent patient safety issues arising.
Although the DATIX system appeared to be working well, the inspectors were provided with
limited other evidence to demonstrate this requirement and could find no records of action
taken in response to issues within the various committee minutes provided. This meant that it
was difficult to assess how effective any action taken by the provider had been other than
being assured that the incident, safety issue or near miss would be reported and investigated.

For the reasons outline above, the inspectors agreed that this Requirement had been Partly
Met.

Requirement 8: Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and apply as
required. The content and significance of the student fitness to practise procedures
must be conveyed to students and aligned to GDC student fitness to practise guidance.
Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar with the GDC Student
Fitness to Practise Guidance (Requirement Partly Met)
Students of the Birmingham BDS sign an agreement to abide by the ‘code of professional
conduct and fitness to practise’ at the start of the programme and at the beginning of each
academic year. Although guidance regarding student conduct and documentation about the
University fitness to practise process was provided to the inspectors, there was some difficulty
dissecting the generic University student fitness to practise processes with the specific
procedures in place at the School and College. In fact, the inspectors found no clear
documentation relating to a School student fitness to practise process. This left a gap prior to
the University process being commenced. In addition, it was found that the University
regulations were not always aligned with the expectations of a programme leading to
professional registration.
The inspectors were told by staff that issues tended to be dealt with within the School and they
did not want students to focus on the final stage of the fitness to practise process. It was
confirmed that when a concern became formal, the University guidance for fitness to practise
was followed. Senior staff explained that whilst the School had encountered some difficulties in
the past with differing expectations between the School and the University, the issues had
always been resolved by the School. The Dean, who is the investigating officer for serious
issues, confirmed that no student would graduate if he was not assured that the student was fit
to practise.
The students that the inspectors spoke to were clear about the level of professionalism
required from them and told the panel that these expectations were reinforced throughout the
programme. However, the students were unable to describe the stages of the process for
dealing with fitness to practise issues within the School. They informed the inspectors that the
first stage was either a warning or a ‘telling off’ from the director of the programme, which could
lead to the completion of a formal warning and concern form, which in turn lead to the formal
fitness to practise process. Students were not able to identify a documented policy or process
related to this area.
Prior to the examination inspection, the inspectors requested and were provided with an
explanatory note and a flowchart of the stages of the School’s fitness to practise process. This
documentation outlined the different routes and where issues would be considered and by
whom. The inspectors found this helpful in clarifying the process and agreed that there was a
need for the entire process and policy to be formalised into a clear document that is closely
aligned with the GDC guidance and will provide students with a comprehensive picture of the
processes for dealing with fitness to practise issues.
The inspectors agreed that this Requirement could only be Partly Met due to the absence of a
clear process for the early stages of student fitness to practise investigations. There was
therefore a clear need to develop more comprehensive documentation that reflects all of the
processes in place.

No

Actions for the provider

Due date
(if applicable)

5

The provider should consider how to ensure that all part-time and
outreach staff remain trained for their role

n/a

7

The provider must ensure that systems are in place to record the
action taken in response to patient safety issues that have been
identified and that these systems report into the School
committee structure

Annual
monitoring
2015

8

The provider must ensure that the student fitness to practise
documentation provides clear and comprehensive guidance and
thresholds that address all stages of the process

Annual
monitoring
2015

Standard 2 – Quality evaluation and review of the programme
The provider must have in place effective policy and procedures for the monitoring and
review of the programme
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
9. The provider will have a framework in place that details how it
manages the quality of the programme which includes
making appropriate changes to ensure the curriculum
continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and
adapts to changing legislation and external guidance. There
must be a clear statement about where responsibility lies for
this function
10. The provider will have systems in place to quality assure
placements
11. Any problems identified through the operation of the quality
management framework must be addressed as soon as
possible
12. Should quality evaluation of the programme identify any
serious threats to the students achieving learning outcomes
through the programme, the GDC must be notified at the
earliest possible opportunity
13. Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external
quality assurance procedures
14. External examiners must be utilised and must be familiar with
the learning outcomes and their context. Providers should
follow QAA guidelines on external examining where
applicable
15. Providers must consider and, where appropriate, act upon
concerns raised or formal reports on the quality of education
and assessment
GDC comments
Requirement 9: The provider will have a framework in place that details how it manages
the quality of the programme which includes making appropriate changes to ensure the
curriculum continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and adapts to
changing legislation and external guidance. There must be a clear statement about
where responsibility lies for this function (Requirement Partly Met)
The inspectors were, at first, unclear about how the committee structure operated and felt that
from the information provided it would be hard for an individual new to the programme to
understand fully the remits and relationships of the various committees. The panel asked how
a new member of staff would gain an understanding of how the committee structures and
associated processes worked at the School. It was explained that new members of staff were
inducted by attending the various meetings, though in future a quality manual would be
available to explain the structure, reporting lines and mechanics of the School’s quality
management system. The inspectors were given a draft version of a BDS quality manual in
advance of the examination inspection and found it to be a very useful document which they

agreed will be a positive and necessary development.
There are a number of School committees, which fit into a defined structure with named
individuals responsible for each of the committees and groups. There are links from all School
committees into the BDS Curriculum Development Committee (BDS CDC), which is the
committee responsible for areas such as ensuring that the programme is aligned with the GDC
learning outcomes and adapts to external changes. The BDS CDC reports to the School
Learning and Teaching Committee (SLTC), which in turn feeds into the College Learning and
Teaching Committee (CLTC). The CLTC is responsible for major changes to the assessment
and course specific learning outcomes across the programmes that are offered by the College.
The BDS programme has a representative on this committee.
There is a School Quality Assurance Lead who is a member of the key School committees, in
addition being a member of to the College QA Committee. There was reference in the
documentation to a ‘School Quality Assurance Committee’ and a ‘School quality meeting’, but
it was not clear to the inspectors how the remit of these differed from that of the School
Executive Committee. The School should ensure that consistent terminology is used in the
new quality manual and other documentation.
The inspectors found that the minutes of meetings that were provided as evidence did not
consistently present a complete picture of the discussions. It was also not always clear from
the minutes how actions had been, or would be, addressed.
Each course lead is responsible for producing an annual course review. Each course review
incorporates feedback received from student questionnaires and external examiner reports. All
course reports are considered by the BDS CDC, membership of which includes all heads of
department with representation from part-time staff and students. It was confirmed to the
inspectors that this is the major decision making group within the School. An annual report for
the BDS programme is produced by the BDS CDC and is considered by the College Quality
Assurance and Enhancement Committee. Students also feed back through the Staff and
Student Liaison Committee to the College committee.
The inspectors were told that the BDS CDC is responsible for identifying and addressing
threats to the programme, such as issues with patient recruitment and ensuring that students
gain sufficient levels of clinical experience. The inspectors were told that issues regarding
student clinical experience with patients tended to arise gradually, rather than suddenly; these
are explored further under Requirement 19.
As the remit of the BDS CDC is wide-ranging, the inspectors felt that there would be a distinct
benefit if a sub-committee or group with a focus on the assessment of students was
established. It was felt that there should be a named individual with responsibility for ensuring
that the programme remains up-to-date with best practice in assessment. This could
incorporate the work being undertaken on the Clinical Assessment Feedback System (CAFS)
and to ensure that final assessments are robust and reliable (see Standard 3, below for further
information).
As well as the BDS CDC having a wide-ranging remit, the inspectors noted that the Director of
Education took on several roles within the programme, including the role of senior welfare
tutor. It was apparent that this individual was absolutely fundamental to the running of the
programme, having management responsibility for many areas. Other senior staff were also
heavily relied on in some areas. The panel agreed that a significant reliance on one individual
being responsible for many areas was a risk to the programme and felt that the School should
reflect on these risks and whether there were ways to mitigate them.
The inspectors acknowledged that whilst there was a quality management framework in place,

it was lacking in clarity and structure. It was agreed that until the QA manual was implemented
and the structure and content of meeting minutes were improved, this Requirement could only
be considered as Partly Met.
Requirement 10: The provider will have systems in place to quality assure placements
(Requirement Met)
Whilst the majority of students’ clinical experience is gained within Trust clinics at the Dental
Hospital and School, the BDS programme utilises a small number of outreach placements in
community clinics offering adult and paediatric primary dental care. This experience is gained
in the Summer Term of the fourth year and the first two terms of the fifth year.
Though there are few outreach locations, these are well known to the School, having offered
BDS students clinical experience for many years. Furthermore, since 2012 the Director of
Education has visited outreach locations on an annual basis. From 2013, these visits have
been formalised and they are supported by a representative of the College quality assurance
team. The visits involve meetings with clinical and non-clinical staff and students. A report is
produced for each visit on a standard pro-forma which summarises the findings and identifies
areas of good practice. The inspectors were able to view a sample of these reports.
It was noted that there were no specific documented policies or procedures provided to the
panel regarding the process for quality assuring outreach placements. This should be
addressed as part of the development of the proposed Quality Manual.
Staff teaching in outreach are encouraged to attend a staff development day, though the
inspectors noted that this was not compulsory and that a number of trainers did not attend
each year. However, in order to standardise educational delivery and assessment across
locations, new outreach staff are required to attend Dental Hospital and School clinics to
observe experienced school staff. If attendance at the annual training day remains optional,
the School should consider utilising experienced School staff to observe outreach trainers on a
regular basis. This is particularly important if clinical experience gained in outreach continues
to be taken into account when considering students’ overall clinical experience.
The inspectors noted that as most of the outreach centres were under the same Trust as the
Dental Hospital and School, it meant that it is possible for patients to continue to be treated by
a student within the Dental Hospital clinics.
The inspectors were assured that this Requirement was Met.

Requirement 11: Any problems identified through the operation of the quality
management framework must be addressed as soon as possible (Requirement Partly
Met)
The inspectors agreed that the School has a framework containing appropriate committees
and other fora to discuss and to address issues raised and concerns that have been identified.
Although there appeared to be overlap between the remit of the committees; the BDS CDC
and the SLTC, which are both well attended committees that consider a range of aspects of
the BDS programme appeared to be responsible for most discussions regarding quality. The
panel was told that issues that require urgent investigation and action are discussed by an
‘Executive Core Group’ chaired by the Head of School.
The inspectors received documentation, including the minutes of the BDS CDC, which
evidenced relevant discussions of programme changes, incidents and actions required. There

was evidence provided within the documentation indicating that the stated actions would be
undertaken, but there was limited evidence of the reporting on the progress of these actions,
or that actions had been completed and the issues identified through the framework had been
resolved. For example, the lack of standard setting in examinations had been identified
through the external examiner process, but there was limited evidence of discussions and
actions arising from this. The inspectors agreed that the School committees should closely
monitor actions being undertaken and report clearly on these.
Although there were mechanisms in place to identify and address problems these
mechanisms were not clearly documented, and there was only limited evidence to
demonstrate that problems identified had been resolved or were being resolved in a
reasonable time frame. Therefore the inspectors found this Requirement to be Partly Met.

Requirement 12: Should quality evaluation of the programme identify any serious
threats to the students achieving learning outcomes through the programme, the GDC
must be notified at the earliest possible opportunity (Requirement Met)
Following on from the above requirements, the inspectors found that there were appropriate
functions in place to enable issues to be identified, which would include serious threats to
students achieving the learning outcomes.
The School provided the example of provision of patients for undergraduate students as a
potential threat to the achievement of the learning outcomes. The inspectors were told that
due to the move to the new Dental Hospital and School outside the City Centre the issues
regarding patient provision could be exacerbated. Further discussion regarding patient
provision can be found under Requirement 19.
The inspectors found that the School was open about the issues it faced and were confident
that any serious threats would be reported to the GDC at the earliest possible opportunity. This
Requirement is Met.
Requirement 13: Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external quality
assurance procedures (Requirement Met)
Each BDS module is subject to a review every year, which is an analysis of the module
undertaken by the module leader in response to a set of questions. The inspectors noted that
some module reviews were far more detailed than others, which appeared to demonstrate
greater analysis and reflection by some module leads. The inspectors found that these more
detailed reviews had a much clearer focus on continuous improvement. These individual
module reviews feed into an annual BDS programme review, which followed the same format
as the individual module reviews.
Further internal quality assurance occurs through a variety of methods under the Birmingham
Integrated Quality Assurance and Enhancement System (BIQAES). BIQAES will be replaced
by the University Policy and Quality Framework, which was under development at the time of
the inspection. The inspectors were told that this new framework will contain all internal quality
assurance mechanisms that the BDS programme is subject to.
The various review processes under the framework include an ‘Enhanced Teaching Quality
Review’ and a ‘Vice-Chancellor’s Review’ regarding education and research. A ‘School Quality
Review’ is also scheduled to take place every five years. This last took place in 2008, with the
2013 review understandably deferred due to the GDC inspection. There is a five-yearly
internal ‘Comprehensive Programme Review’, which was last undertaken in 2011. The

inspectors agreed that the findings of this review were helpful and constructive and it appeared
to be a very effective tool for improvement. It was clear that the School had taken action in
response to this review in several areas, for example, the quality assurance of outreach
placements.
The inspectors noted that the School was in transition to a new framework and reference was
made in the evidence supplied to numerous different reviews, which may reduce in number
once this transition is complete. However, there were a high number of internal reviews
referenced in the evidence and in meetings with staff and, although it may not be in the
School’s control, the inspectors felt that it would be helpful if fewer, but more thorough, reviews
took place.
Additional quality assurance comes from the BDS external examiners, who are appointed for
each year of the programme. It was noted that external examiners for the early years of the
BDS had identified the need for standard setting within the programme’s assessments. It was
disappointing that this had not been identified in relation to the final assessment. The
inspectors noted that for the final examination external examiners are unable to fulfil an
effective quality assurance role. This is discussed under Requirements 14 and 22.
Externally, the University is subject to inspections by the Quality Assurance Agency (QAA).
The inspectors found that this Requirement was Met.
Requirement 14: External examiners must be utilised and must be familiar with the
learning outcomes and their context. Providers should follow QAA guidelines on
external examining where applicable (Requirement Partly Met)
The inspectors noted that external examiners received a detailed induction from the University
and from the Dental School in their role at Birmingham. The inspectors agreed that this
appeared to be an excellent introduction to the programme. The five external examiners
present at the final examination were all experienced individuals who work, or had worked, at
UK dental schools. Reviewing the documentation provided prior to the inspection, the
inspectors established that the School utilised external examiners at every key stage of the
programme where progression decisions were made, which was felt to be good practice.
During the final examination, the inspectors were able to observe the role of the final year
external examiners. It was clear that the QAA guidance on the use of external examiners could
not be followed due to all five of the external examiners spending the vast majority of their time
directly examining students which meant they were not available to undertake any other role
while the exams were taking place. It was noted that, except in the case of the written papers,
there was no individual who could be considered to have over-arching sight of the assessment
process and could evaluate the performance and calibration of the assessments, including
examiner performance. The role that external examiners played was reflected in the external
examiner reports, with feedback focused heavily on the content of the written papers. The
panel felt that the programme would significantly benefit if external examiners were able to
review the entirety of the final assessments, including having sight of the decisions made and
the grades awarded for continuous clinical assessment elements and of how these were
determined.
The inspectors saw that there was slight variability in the questioning styles and marking
process of the panels and that these areas would have been likely to be identified by an
external examiner, had they been utilised in a QA role.
The School made it clear to the inspectors that external examiners had always examined at

Birmingham and that this was permitted by the University. When discussing the use of
externals with the inspectors, the School indicated that it would consider different ways of
utilising external examiners in future, though it still wished them to examine in finals if possible.
The inspectors agreed that the School must evaluate how to get the most value from their
external examiners in terms of overall feedback on all elements of the finals and how to
encourage the critical appraisal of assessments and elicit suggestions for development. It was
clear from discussions with the external examiners that they believed any additional tasks
would lead to an unacceptable workload. The panel noted that the School had ensured that
the external examiner panel covered a wide range of specialty areas. However, the primary
role was to assess candidates in a general assessment without the other external examiners
present. As part of their considerations regarding external examiner use in future, the School
may wish to investigate to what extent the involvement of external examiners in their current
role in the final examinations has affected the outcome of the assessments.
Although the external examiners utilised were appropriate for the programme, the School has
not followed QAA guidelines on the use of external examiners. This is because directly
assessing the students takes the majority of their time, preventing them from undertaking a
fuller quality assurance role. For this reason the Requirement is Partly Met

Requirement 15: Providers must consider and, where appropriate, act upon concerns
raised or formal reports on the quality of education and assessment (Requirement
Partly Met)
Within the evidence supplied to demonstrate this requirement, the School did not direct the
inspectors to any specific examples where concerns had been acted on, although it was
possible to see some examples of action taken through evidence provided in relation to other
requirements.
The School receives feedback reports from a range of sources, including through the various
reviews in BIQAES and the external examiner system as previously described. The School
appeared to have taken action to address a number of matters raised within the reports it had
received. However, the inspectors noted that the School had been slow to act on some
suggestions, including those regarding standard setting of assessments following the 2011
Comprehensive Programme Review and external examiner feedback, which is discussed
under Standard 3.
The collection and consideration of feedback from students is well-established for the BDS
programme, with a variety of feedback systems available and routinely used. In addition, there
is student representation on a large number of committees, including the BDS CDC as well as
the Staff and Student Liaison Committee. Student feedback is also integrated in the annual
module and programme reviews.
The inspectors noted that the last School Quality Review took place in 2008 and this review
recommended that there should be better documentation of processes within the School. The
inspectors considered that there remained work to be undertaken in this area and progress
had been slow to address this.
Though there were a number of systems in place for reporting on the quality of education and
assessment, there was not sufficient evidence available to demonstrate that action had been
taken in response to the range of concerns raised and the contents of formal reports and
therefore the inspectors agreed that this Requirement was Partly Met.

Actions
No
9

Action required
The proposed QA manual must be implemented as soon as
possible and should include reference to all relevant
committees and provide direction for the content and structure
of minutes of meetings.

Due date
Annual
monitoring
2015

9

A specific committee or group with responsibility for
assessment should be introduced into the committee structure

n/a

10

The School should ensure that the process for quality assuring
placements is documented in the proposed Quality Manual

n/a

10

Outreach training should be strengthened by making
attendance at development days mandatory for outreach
trainers or by visiting placements to observe the training and
supervision taking place

n/a

11

The provider must ensure that there is clear reporting of actions
taken in response to problems identified under the quality
management framework. All problems should be monitored and
reported on until they are resolved

Annual
monitoring
2015

13

The University and School should consider whether it would be
more beneficial for the BDS programme if it was subject to
fewer, but more thorough, internal reviews

n/a

14

The provider must review its use of external examiners in the
final BDS assessments, with the aim of ensuring that a more
comprehensive quality assurance role is achieved

Update to
be provided
in advance
of the 2015
final
assessment

15

The School must ensure that there is a system in place to
record and monitor actions taken in relation to concerns raised
and development points from reports received

Annual
monitoring
2015

Standard 3– Student assessment
Assessment must be reliable and valid. The choice of assessment method must be
appropriate to demonstrate achievement of the GDC learning outcomes. Assessors
must be fit to perform the assessment task
Requirements
Met
Partly Not
met
met
16. To award the qualification, providers must be assured that
students have demonstrated attainment across the full range
of learning outcomes, at a level sufficient to indicate they are
safe to begin practice. This assurance should be underpinned
by a coherent approach to aggregation and triangulation, as
well as the principles of assessment referred to in these
standards.
17. The provider will have in place management systems to plan,
monitor and record the assessment of students throughout
the programme against each of the learning outcomes
18. Assessment must involve a range of methods appropriate to
the learning outcomes and these should be in line with
current practice and routinely monitored, quality assured and
developed
19. Students will have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and will undertake each activity relating
to patient care on sufficient occasions to enable them to
develop the skills and the level of competency to achieve the
relevant GDC learning outcomes
20. The provider should seek to improve student performance by
encouraging reflection and by providing feedback1.
21. Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills,
experience and training to undertake the task of assessment,
appropriate general or specialist registration with a regulatory
body
22. Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent
to which assessment processes are rigorous, set at the
correct standard, ensure equity of treatment for students and
have been fairly conducted
23. Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear
criteria. Standard setting must be employed for summative
assessments
24. Where appropriate, patient/peer/customer feedback
should contribute to the assessment process
25. Where possible, multiple samples of performance must
be taken to ensure the validity and reliability of the
assessment conclusion

1

Reflective practice should not be part of the assessment process in a way that risks effective student use

26. The standard expected of students in each area to be
assessed must be clear and students and staff involved
in assessment must be aware of this standard

Standard 3 comments
Requirement 16: To award the qualification, providers must be assured that students
have demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes, at a level
sufficient to indicate they are safe to begin practice. This assurance should be
underpinned by a coherent approach to aggregation and triangulation, as well as the
principles of assessment referred to in these standards (Requirement Partly Met)
In advance of the programme inspection, the inspectors reviewed the completed mapping
exercise undertaken for the purposes of this GDC inspection. This highlighted when and where
in the BDS programme each of the GDC learning outcomes from The First Five Years would
be assessed. The inspectors noted that the School utilised a wide range of assessment
methods and that each learning outcome could be assessed on multiple occasions.
It was disappointing that the School did not have a central blueprint that could be used to
manage the coverage of learning outcomes within and across assessments. Such a document
or system would provide assurance about when and how each learning outcome is assessed
in the programme. The inspectors agreed that a blueprint would also help staff to adapt the
programme to future changes to the GDC learning outcomes and to other external
documentation and guidance.
The School told the inspectors that each specialty area has its own required learning outcomes
and each specialty lead is responsible for ensuring that every student has met all of these. The
inspectors were also informed that there were many generic learning outcomes that were
taught and assessed in the pre or non-clinical environment or throughout the programme
across several modules. However, it was not clear to the panel from the documentation
provided how coverage through assessment and the attainment of all GDC learning outcomes
were managed by the School. The inspectors found that there was only limited demonstrable
planning of assessments against the learning outcomes and no evidence was provided that
explained how assessments were designed to cover specific individual GDC learning
outcomes
The inspectors noted that students are allocated a personal tutor when they begin the
programme and remain with this tutor throughout the five years of the BDS. Termly meetings
take place between this personal tutor and the student where the student’s assessment grades
are available and discussed. Staff told the inspectors that the personal tutor is responsible for
identifying academic problems at an early stage. The inspectors noted that pastoral care at
Birmingham was particularly strong and students were engaged with the system in place.
However, the panel agreed that there appeared to be an over-reliance on the pastoral system
to pick up poorly performing students. At the time of the inspection there appeared to be limited
evidence available which demonstrated how students performing weakly in particular areas of
the programme would be picked up centrally and how the School calibrates issues for referral
across the personal tutors.
The inspectors were informed that individual student and group performance is discussed at
termly progress meetings, where a summary of student experience and performance is
reviewed. The inspectors were told that all relevant staff attend these meetings and that
student performance across all areas is scrutinised. During these meetings students who are
underperforming across multiple areas of the programme are identified; however the

inspectors could find no reference as to how this is achieved nor what criteria or information
were considered when determining whether there was a concern about a student.
If a student is deemed to be under-performing or falling behind they are directed to undertake
additional targeted teaching. If their performance is not satisfactory across all or most areas
they must discuss this with the Director of Education who is also the senior welfare tutor.
Following this discussion an action plan is put in place for that student.
There are gateway tests and end of year tests that may lead to a student repeating a year,
failing, or taking an exit degree. There have been a number of students that have left with the
exit degree and each year a number of students are required to repeat the year.
As described under Requirement 19, on occasion the inspectors found that it was not always
clear from the documentation how it was determined that some students had demonstrated
particular clinical outcomes from The First Five Years, where it appeared that they had limited
experience with specific ‘types’ of patient and in specific clinical procedures. From viewing the
entirety of student experience the inspectors noted that the School ‘could’ be assured that
students had adequate experience if transferrable skills and other factors were taken into
account. Discussions with staff provided some explanation about how this was achieved;
however, no documentation was provided that clearly evidenced discussions about this
process. Although the School holds progress meetings which discuss student clinical
experience, from the evidence provided it was difficult to understand the format of these
meetings and how progress decisions were reached. The scope and effectiveness of these
meetings were hard to assess as only limited records of discussions were kept. The inspectors
were told by staff that progress meetings followed a mechanistic process, which the panel felt
may not allow for full consideration of transferrable skills when making decisions about student
achievement and progression.
Following on from this, it was very difficult for the inspectors to understand all of the steps in
the process that permitted students to be ‘signed up’ to sit the final examinations. One reason
for this was that the individual handbooks for different areas did not routinely contain the same
level or type of information. Therefore, although the panel had sight of the amount of clinical
treatment each student had undertaken across different areas, it was difficult to gain a full
understanding about the minimum expectations of clinical experience and skill. Combined with
the lack of detail in the progress minutes, the process was rather opaque to the inspection
panel. The inspectors agreed that these handbooks should be in a consistent format.
The inspectors agreed that the School needs to take action to ensure that full records of these
discussions and decisions regarding ‘sign up’ to the final examinations are kept and that
evidence is provided to demonstrate this as part of the 2015 Annual Monitoring return for this
programme.
Final assessment elements:
The inspectors noted that students were automatically signed up for the final assessments,
based on the achievement of pass grades in all previous assessments and it being determined
that they have achieved the required levels of clinical experience and competence. Continuous
clinical assessment is centred on students achieving a certain level of competence, having
gained sufficient experience across the GDP clinics and specialty areas. An overall grade of AE is awarded based on the student’s performance across the GDP clinics. A-E grades are also
given for each specialty clinic and these are collated into one final specialty grade. These
grades contribute to the final award.
A borderline fail grade of D in the continuous clinical assessment elements can be
compensated by the seen case element of the final assessments. The inspectors questioned

whether a candidate who received a borderline fail grade in either of these continuous clinical
assessment elements of the programme should be able to proceed to finals. The seen case
assessment would be unlikely to assess the required range of outcomes, particularly in
professionalism, to anything like the same level as a collection of many assessments
throughout the previous year. It appeared to be counter-intuitive that the continuous clinical
assessment, which is the most valid for future practice, could be failed and a student still
awarded a BDS. Therefore it was agreed by the panel that it should not be relied on as
compensatory for the continuous assessment elements.
The inspectors strongly recommend that the continuous assessment GDP element and
specialty elements should both be passed in their own right; however, if the School continues
to permit progress with a D grade, this should be mitigated by grading criteria that confirms the
individual student possessed the requisite knowledge and skills for safe practice.
Preparing for Practice:
School staff informed the inspectors that they were reasonably confident that the BDS met the
learning outcomes from Preparing for Practice (PFP) and explained that some further work
was being undertaken alongside the medical school which would better address the
management and leadership outcomes. The inspectors noted that CAFS was set up to map
against the learning outcomes from PFP.
The Birmingham BDS is currently a programme in transition, working to both learning outcome
documents. This did create some problems in demonstrating the blueprinting of teaching and
assessment to the panel. In turn, this made it hard for the inspectors to judge this requirement,
as is described above. There is, therefore, a requirement for the School to develop a blueprint
that clearly maps assessments used in the BDS programme against the learning outcomes
from Preparing for Practice. This blueprint should be used as a reference point to assist with
designing assessments and recording where things are taught and assessed in the
programme.
Although evidence was presented that demonstrated a level of assurance that the students
were assessed against the GDC learning outcomes, the inspectors found that the evidence
provided was unsupportive of a coherent approach to the aggregation and triangulation of
assessments. The information presented to the panel lacked detail and there was a lack of
coherence in the data presented to inform the decisions made. For these reasons this
Requirement is Partly Met.
Requirement 17: The provider will have in place management systems to plan, monitor
and record the assessment of students throughout the programme against each of the
learning outcomes (Requirement Partly Met)
As discussed under Requirement 16, above, the inspectors noted that the School did not have
a central management system that enabled an effective blueprint of student assessments
against the individual learning outcomes from The First Five Years. However, the School had
systems in place to record results of all summative assessments centrally and individual
clinical assessments within the GDP and specialty areas.
There was little evidence provided to the inspectors that clearly demonstrated how the School
ensured individual assessments were designed to address the required learning outcomes and
how the range of assessments in place provided adequate coverage of all of the required GDC
learning outcomes. In relation to the final assessments, the inspectors did not see any
evidence that demonstrated consideration that specific GDC learning outcomes must be
assessed in individual elements or across all final examinations. It was felt by the inspectors

that a key reason for this is the absence of a blueprint.
Based on the above findings, the inspectors agreed that there was a clear need for the
programme to develop clearer linkage between summative and continuous clinical
assessments and the GDC learning outcomes. This must be undertaken in future in respect of
the learning outcomes from Preparing to Practise.
Overall, the inspectors found that there was a lack of clarity about how information relating to
student performance is collated to make robust decisions on progression. It was clear that
CAFS will be central in the School meeting this requirement in the future. This is being
introduced for the Year 3 cohort and the inspectors anticipated that with a good blueprint sitting
behind this system it would allow the programme to fully meet this requirement as this cohort
enters the final year. At the time of the inspection, the panel found that this Requirement had
been Partly Met.
Requirement 18: Assessment must involve a range of methods appropriate to the
learning outcomes and these should be in line with current practice and routinely
monitored, quality assured and developed (Requirement Partly Met)
It was clear to the inspectors that the alignment of assessments to the GDC learning outcomes
requires further work. However, as this is described in detail within the above requirements no
further comment will be made here.
The School utilises a range of formative and summative assessments across the various
stages of the programme. The inspectors were told that the philosophy of the summative
assessment used was to ensure that the students had the required knowledge and
understanding, and to test generic skills. The inspectors were also informed that the University
is looking to streamline assessments, but the School was in control of the assessments used in
the BDS programme and would have the final word on the assessments used.
The inspectors found that, generally, the range of summative assessments used were
appropriate for the areas being tested. Objective structured clinical examinations (OSCEs)
have been introduced for elements of the programme, though not for the final assessment. The
panel was provided with a sample of OSCE stations used and although a small number of the
stations appeared to be based on multiple choice questions which could be assessed
elsewhere, the OSCE appeared on paper to be a valid and appropriate test of students’
applied knowledge and skills.
Whilst on the clinic students receive a single grade for each session. The inspectors were
informed that the grade received takes into account performance and ability, professionalism
and communication skills. The inspectors noted that CAFS would record areas such as
professionalism and communication separately and therefore should be able to better identify
those students who may be weaker in these areas. This was felt to be a potential improvement
on the current scheme.
The inspectors observed the ‘seen’ and ‘unseen’ case elements of the final examinations and
had access to the written paper elements. These are very traditional assessments and are
similar to those that have been utilised at UK dental schools for many years. The inspectors
considered that several aspects of the final assessments were no longer in line with current
practice and would benefit from significant review. This is a sensible time for the School to
review their assessments and the inspectors recommend that the School appoints a lead
and/or a consultant to assist them with this. The inspectors felt that this task will be a
considerable undertaking and it would be difficult to add this to the workload of senior
members of the staff team.

An area where the School is out of step with other providers is the limited use of standard
setting in the BDS programme. The inspectors were provided with some evidence that
standard setting was used in assessments that occurred at earlier stages of the programme,
however, there was no use of standard setting in the final assessments, including the written
papers. Further commentary regarding standard setting can be found under Requirement 23.
The inspectors found no evidence of a robust formal quality assurance mechanism for the final
assessments, with no individual or group of individuals having oversight of the range of
assessments used. In addition, for the ‘seen’ and ‘unseen’ case elements there was no
mechanism in place to ensure issues such as inter-panel variability did not arise. The role of
external examiners is discussed under Requirement 22. No evidence was provided to the
inspectors to demonstrate that any analysis of the assessment or the examiner performance
took place after the exam.
The range of assessments used was felt to be appropriate to assess the learning outcomes,
but there was limited evidence of routine monitoring and development of these, specifically the
final assessments. There seemed to have been little development of any of the aspects of the
final assessments since the GDC report from 2004, which is unusual considering the changes
to current practice in assessment that have occurred within this period. Although there were a
range of appropriate assessments, for the reasons outlined above, the inspectors found this
Requirement to be Partly Met.
Requirement 19: Students will have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and will undertake each activity relating to patient care on
sufficient occasions to enable them to develop the skills and the level of competency to
achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes (Requirement Partly Met)
Shortly before the final examination inspection, the inspectors were provided with summaries
from each specialty area and the GDP area that outlined the clinical experience of the final
year students. The inspectors agreed that the overall experience of students was generally
comparable with other UK BDS programmes, however, it was noted that experience in some
areas was low.
The BDS uses a points system to establish whether students have accumulated enough
clinical experience to progress through the programme. The inspectors were told by the School
that by adopting a points system that considers the global total number of procedures, rather
than individual procedures, it encouraged holistic patient care and helped to ensure that
students were not ‘chasing numbers’ but focused on providing the right care to best serve their
patients’ interests. To ensure experience across the required range of procedures, the points
system used is accompanied by benchmarks of core procedures or minimum treatment
numbers, in areas such as endodontics and dentures. The inspectors noted that the
benchmarks were set at a low number for some core procedures and that, on occasion, not all
students would achieve these. The School acknowledged that they could not always ensure
the required experience with full dentures due to the patients available and that students could
progress without the experience of all stages of this procedure being undertaken on a patient.
In addition, for periodontic procedures the inspectors were told that there are stated minimum
requirements for a student to ‘aim’ for, but on occasion the student could be admitted to the
final examinations with less experience than this in a procedure. The panel was disappointed
not to receive any information that demonstrated that student clinical experience and ability
had been discussed at progress meetings. Overall, the inspectors found a lack of clarity in the
evidence provided about how student experience is monitored and developed to ensure that all
students gain the appropriate breadth of clinical experience.

The inspectors noted that every dental school will have some difficulties in ensuring that all of
their students will see a wide enough range of patients to gain the necessary experience
across all areas. The panel was told that since the last GDC inspection of the Birmingham
BDS, the Dental Hospital and School had started to advertise to recruit patients for student
clinics and had changed the times of clinics in an effort to attract more patients. The staff
interviewed told the inspectors that they felt that both these measures had been very effective
and commented that the students spend more time working clinically than they did previously.
The inspectors acknowledged that the Dental Hospital and School had to be very proactive to
get enough paediatric patients as there are significant levels of fluoride in the water in the
region, but it was clear that the steps taken to access paediatric patients had not been enough.
The inspectors agreed that the Dental Hospital and School must recognise that it is critical to
the programme that the patient supply for students, across all areas, is assured to enable the
students to graduate as safe beginners. Therefore, the Dental Hospital and School must take
action to ensure that the patient supply across paediatrics, endodontics and prosthodontics is
sufficient to enable all students gain enough experience. Additionally, the Dental Hospital and
School should ensure that adequate patients are available to be assured that all students are
assessed as competent in the use and removal of all restorative materials they are likely to
encounter when they begin practice, including both composite materials and amalgam.
The students that the inspectors met with were content with the amount and variety of
experience treating patients on the programme and commended the help they were given to
access patients requiring the treatments that they needed to gain more experience in.
Considering the limited experience that students had in some areas, such as paediatric
dentistry, the inspectors were surprised by this response.
The School told the panel that outreach placements play an important role in preparing
students for practice upon graduation and are essential for students to gain sufficient
experience in areas such as paediatrics. The inspectors agreed that it would be a great benefit
if the outreach provision could be increased in line with the majority of other dental schools
and students could gain more experience outside the Dental Hospital and School The panel
was aware that there are several factors that may make this difficult, but also noted that it may
be necessary to explore this further to ensure that students gained the necessary clinical
experience in the areas mentioned previously. If there continue to be difficulties in students
gaining adequate clinical experience in all areas, particularly with regard to the move out of the
City Centre, the inspectors agreed that expanding placements outside the Dental Hospital and
School and local area may be the only viable option.
During the meetings with senior staff, the inspectors were content that the School was awake
to the threats to the patient supply for the BDS programme involved in the move to the new
premises. However, no analysis of these potentially significant threats was provided as
evidence and the inspectors would welcome sight of mitigation plans in place to address these
threats.
The inspectors found the various approaches to ensuring individual students had gained
requisite clinical experience to be fit to practise as a safe beginner rather ‘untidy’ and
considered that there must be further investigation into establishing a system to better manage
this area. In relation to this, the panel was informed that the School was revisiting the points
system and the associated processes with the introduction of CAFS and it was likely that the
system would be changed in future. As there are some considerable issues regarding access
to particular procedures and the availability of patients of a specific type, the inspectors
considered that a more suitable system would help the School better identify and track patient
access issues.
The inspectors agreed that if a post for an assessment lead and/or committee was

established, this should help the School to ensure consistency between GDP and specialty
clinics, set clear expectations for clinical competence and experience and to link these
expectations with CAFS.
The inspectors felt that although overall levels of clinical experience were comparable to other
dental schools and the School was able to produce evidence of students’ clinical experience
upon request there were considerable issues in some clinical areas. The continuous
monitoring of clinical experience could also be improved. The inspectors, therefore, found that
this Requirement had been Partly Met.
Requirement 20: The provider should seek to improve student performance by
encouraging reflection and by providing feedback (Requirement Met)
The panel was told that reflection is introduced in the Introduction to Clinical Dentistry module
in the first year and carries on throughout the programme. The inspectors were informed that
students are encouraged to reflect in their workbook and progress file, in discussions with their
personal tutor and when reviewing their clinical performance with the supervisor. It was
acknowledged that it would be hard to get all students to complete their reflective logs to a high
standard and that it may not be productive to force individuals to reflect. The inspectors were
told that CAFS would make feedback easier for students. After viewing a demonstration of the
system, the inspectors agreed with this statement.
Written or oral feedback is provided for all course work, practical work and clinical activity.
Feedback received includes group feedback on exam performance and individual clinical
assessment reports each term, which are reviewed with the relevant staff member. Personal
tutors are directed by the University handbook to help students to get the most value from the
feedback they receive. The handbook for personal tutors comprehensively covers their role in
helping students to get the most value from feedback received and encouraging them to reflect
on performance. Some staff stated that they felt that the amount of feedback students received
could be overwhelming at times.
The student groups that the inspectors met with told them that the timeliness and quality of
feedback received was very good. As the students work in small groups they told the
inspectors that they get the right amount of attention and that they also receive immediate
feedback for some activities. If required, the students were also able to book individual
feedback sessions with staff. The students who had begun to use CAFS were happy with the
immediate feedback that was received and also that they were able look back over the
feedback provided in previous sessions and their reflections on this. The inspectors were told
by the students that patient feedback would be incorporated into CAFS at a later date. The
students also indicated that they would discuss the things that had gone well and those that
had not gone well with the tutor before any work was graded. The inspectors found that the
students who were interviewed clearly understood the importance of reflection and that this
was something that would play an crucial role in their professional lives.
Although the documentary evidence supplied by the School prior to the inspection to
demonstrate this requirement was limited, the inspectors agreed that the Requirement was Met
as a result of their meetings with the staff and students. It was noted that the introduction of
CAFS will be provide significant assistance to Birmingham students when reflecting on their
practice.
Requirement 21: Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills, experience and
training to undertake the task of assessment, appropriate general or specialist
registration with a regulatory body (Requirement Partly Met)

During the inspection the School provided the inspectors with a list of examiners. The
inspectors noted that all clinical examiners and assessors had appropriate registration with the
GDC.
The documentation provided prior to the inspection stated that “All internal examiners have
achieved the necessary level of training and experience to conduct student assessment…” and
there was evidence available to the panel that outlined the formal qualifications the internal
examiners held. However, there was no documentary evidence provided to the panel that gave
details of specific training that examiners and clinical assessors had received for the task of
assessment at Birmingham. Staff told the inspectors that calibration of continuous
assessments is addressed through the staff development day and there are specific criteria
that guide staff in this exercise. The inspectors were told that a recent in-house ‘train the
trainers’ day focused on question setting, linking assessments to the learning outcomes,
standard setting and psychometrics. Further details of these efforts to train staff in assessment
and to ensure calibration were not provided as evidence to the inspectors.
The inspectors received details of the peer observation process as evidence to demonstrate
this requirement. It was agreed that this was an area of good practice, although it appeared
that the primary focus of this exercise was on teaching rather than assessment.
The inspectors observed the examiner briefings at the start of each of the final examination
days. During the briefing the conduct of the examination was explained, including that it was
expected of examiners to mark independently and then come together to agree a mark for
each element. Examiners were also told to relate all questions to the case that was presented.
The School provided external examiner reports as evidence of this requirement and, as has
been commented elsewhere, the external examiners undergo a very thorough induction
process. It was therefore surprising that a new examiner did not know until the first day of the
final examinations that they would be directly examining the students.
The grading system was traditional and easy to follow, with descriptors of performance
attached to each grade. The inspectors agreed that the final examination briefing would have
benefitted from a greater focus on the circumstances where it is appropriate to award grades of
D and E and the key differences between them.
The inspectors agreed that this Requirement was Partly Met as further attention should be paid
to the examiner briefing and training regarding setting assessments and marking student
performance against the learning outcomes.

Requirement 22: Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent to
which assessment processes are rigorous, set at the correct standard, ensure equity of
treatment for students and have been fairly conducted (Requirement Partly Met)
Please note that Requirement 14 describes the use of external examiners in the Birmingham
BDS final examinations.
As evidence for this requirement, the School provided the University of Birmingham Guidance
for External Examiners. The inspectors noted that this guidance stated “We do not ask our
external examiners to determine marks for individual students but to consider, and provide
feedback on, the consistency and accuracy of marking across a cohort. This is achieved
through reviewing the marking within each module, and between modules of the same level.”
The inspectors found that this guidance did not apply to the BDS programme.

The School requests that the external examiners for the final examinations provide feedback in
their reports on these assessments. However, the inspectors found that the responses given to
specific questions about the rigour and standard of the examinations were focused on the
written elements rather than the case presentation (or ‘seen’ case) and the unseen case.
There was also no consideration of the continuous clinical assessment grades by the external
examiners. There is the opportunity for the external examiners to provide feedback at the
examiners’ meetings on wider areas, but the inspectors agreed that this might not be the
easiest environment for critical feedback to be conveyed and that it also would not give the
individual time to reflect. The inspectors noted that external examiners are not well-placed to
comment on the equity of treatment of the students as they are examining the students the
majority of the time. There is therefore no individual who takes a step back from examining
students and is able to comment on this area, for example, identifying differences in the
approaches of the examiner groups. It should be noted that the inspectors found only slight
variation in how panels examined, but it was felt that this would have been picked up by an
external examiner undertaking a role with oversight of the different panels.
The School told the inspectors that they had always used external examiners to examine and
they were open to considering how this worked in future. The inspectors acknowledged that
the School had used external examiners in this way for a long time, but questioned the benefit
of this. It might be a useful exercise for the School to determine whether the results would have
been different had the external examiners not directly examined the students. The inspectors
felt that it is questionable whether the external examiners are providing the most value to the
assessments in their current role and it was agreed that the School must investigate this
further. Should the School modernise its assessment methods and use of external examiners,
it should be able to gather information on examiner performance which would further mitigate
the removal or reduction of the external examiners’ roles in examining students directly.
If, as would be desirable, the School utilises some or all external examiners in a role that
allows them oversight of the entire final assessment process, the inspectors agreed that they
should consider appointing an external examiner with experience of this role and expertise in
modern assessment methods. The inspectors agreed that the role of the external examiner
should also be widened to consider the sign-up for the final assessments, including the sign off
process for the continuous assessment elements in clinical practice.
The inspectors found only limited evidence of programme developments that had been made
following feedback received from external examiners and found this concerning considering
the extensive use of external examiners throughout the programme.
The panel was assured that the external examiners are asked to report on the rigour, standard,
fairness and treatment of students, but the panel agreed that the role of the external did not
enable them to provide comments that were as informed as they could be. For this reason, this
Requirement is Partly Met.
Requirement 23: Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear criteria.
Standard setting must be employed for summative assessments (Requirement Partly
Met)
The inspectors noted that the students were generally content that the assessments they
undertook were fair and that they understood what they had to do to pass. The inspectors,
however, experienced some difficulty in establishing that there had been sufficient efforts
undertaken to ensure that the criteria required to pass were understood by all examiners and
that the standard set to be awarded the BDS was demonstrably appropriate.
Regarding continuous clinical assessments, the inspectors noted that a grade between A and

E was awarded for each clinical session and that there was a separate competency scale used
for individual clinical procedures, namely: Proficient, Competent, Learner, Novice, Observer.
The inspectors agreed that the competency scale had appropriate grade descriptors, which did
not permit a grade of competent or above if the student had received assistance with the
procedure. The inspectors noted that the grades available and the accompanying descriptors
appeared in some of the student handbooks, but did not appear in others. As stated under
Requirement 16, the inspectors felt that the School must endeavour to bring greater
consistency in the design, purpose and content of the handbooks. The inspectors were told
that theoretical knowledge and understanding, as well as clinical performance and
professionalism, are taken into account when awarding grades on clinic. It was not clear how
the process that brought the various elements together to arrive at the final grade worked.
It was extremely difficult for the panel to get a clear understanding about how the marking
across each specialty area functioned, the discussions that took place to ensure that each
student was safe to practise in that area and how compensation worked between the different
areas. This difficulty extended to the award of the final grades for clinical practice, including the
grades given that contributed to the final degree award.
The inspectors noted that formal standard setting procedures were not present in the final
summative assessment and felt strongly that this should not happen where an examination is
of such high stakes for both the student and the general public.
The panel was informed that standard setting had been used in determining the pass marks
and grade boundaries in a small number of assessments taking place at earlier stages of the
BDS programme and some evidence was provided to demonstrate this. As the final
assessments are high stakes assessments, it was surprising that the marking in some
elements was purely based on intention grades awarded by (albeit experienced) examiners,
particularly when combined with the lack of oversight and quality management of examiner
performance.
Students received a grade of A-E for each written paper and the pass grade of C was set at
50%. The inspectors found no evidence that instructed question writers to design questions for
Paper 2 so that the just passing candidate should score 50%. There was also no evidence
received that directed those compiling the papers to ensure that they should have
consideration of a 50% pass mark, when the questions were combined into a paper. After
viewing the results of the 2014 final written papers it appeared that some of the questions were
not discriminatory. It was noted that the standards for the two written papers were set at very
different levels. Paper 1, which was essay based and for which the instructions directed
markers to award the borderline passing candidate 50% (which was converted to a grade of
‘C’) had 45% of students scoring C or below with 5% of students scoring an A grade. Paper 2,
which had no reference to standard setting, had 3% scoring a C (no students scored below C)
and 53% obtaining an A grade. Efforts must be made to set the standard of these assessments
in a manner that the School can demonstrate is at the appropriate level.
The School indicated that they only wished to use standard setting processes that work for the
programme and that would highlight good performance. The inspectors noted that although a
standard setting procedure such as Angoff may not be ideal for an assessment that has
several points to set a standard for, it was clear that the lack of any apparent standard setting
for some elements was not acceptable. The inspectors were informed that the School had
adopted the Cohen standard setting process used by the medical school at Birmingham for the
Human Disease examination, but this had proved unsuitable due to the cohort size. The
School indicated that it intends to use the Angoff standard setting process for suitable
assessments, and that it had used the borderline group method for the OSCE assessments,
but warned that it will take up to three years to fully implement. It was also commented that
mixed groups of GDPs and specialists would be used to ensure that the standard was set at

the right level, which the inspectors noted as potential good practice.
In determining the final award for the BDS, the inspectors found that the grading/compensation
matrices were clear, although it did take some time to fully understand them. However, as
stated above, it was not clear to the inspectors how final grades were determined for the
specialist teaching and clinical practice elements that fed into the matrices.
The School may find it useful and interesting to compare student performance in robustly
standard-set assessments against assessments with an arbitrarily set pass mark and fully
subjective assessments.
The inspectors agreed that the School must seriously investigate the use of more reliable
assessment methods at this crucial final stage and standard setting must be used where it can
be. The expertise of the experienced examiners available in Birmingham should not be
underplayed, but it was agreed this expertise must be applied within a stronger and clearer
framework.
It was noted that the need for standard setting had been identified several years ago, including
in the 2011 comprehensive programme review. The inspectors agreed that the work to
integrate standard setting process across the programme, particularly for the final
assessments, is a priority action for the School. It should be acknowledged that work had
begun to investigate how standard setting would be best achieved for the Birmingham BDS,
including piloting this within different areas. However, progress to fully implement standard
setting has been slow. The inspectors agreed that an action plan for the implementation of
standard setting must be provided to the GDC as a priority and subsequently reported through
the GDC Annual Monitoring process.
The lack of robust standard-setting procedures suggest that this requirement has not been
met, however, due to the clear assessment criteria in place the inspectors agreed that this
Requirement was just Partly Met.
Requirement 24: Where appropriate, patient/peer/customer feedback should
contribute to the assessment process (Requirement Partly Met)
Although the NHS Trust collects patient feedback it is not gathered in such a way that specific
students can be identified and the feedback shared with them. The inspectors were told that
this would be a future development within the programme and it was intended that patient
feedback would be collected through CAFS.
The collection and analysis of the patient feedback provided as evidence was focused on
patient perceptions of their treatment and identifying the causes of patient dissatisfaction,
rather than assessment of students. For this reason, the evidence supplied had only limited
relevance to this requirement.
At the time of the inspection, the only patient feedback that fed into the assessment process
occurred informally through the continuous clinical assessment process. The inspectors were
told that patient feedback provided on clinic would contribute to the grade the student was
awarded, but how this was done was not formalised.
The Year 5 students told the inspectors that patients were occasionally given forms and if the
feedback related to their work this would be fed back to them. They confirmed that all patients
are given the appropriate contact details for complaints and praise.
The inspectors noted that there was some evidence of peer feedback in the first three years of

the programme in the form of communication skills role-play exercises. It was also noted that
students would provide peer feedback when paired in clinical settings.
As there was only very limited use of peer and patient feedback in assessment the inspectors
found that this Requirement was Partly Met.
Requirement 25: Where possible, multiple samples of performance must be taken to
ensure the validity and reliability of the assessment conclusion (Requirement Partly
Met)
The inspectors noted that the School uses a broad range of valid and appropriate assessment
methods which are used at repeated intervals throughout the programme. However, as
described above, it was not clear how ‘joined up’ the assessments were to ensure appropriate
coverage of the GDC learning outcomes. Although School staff meet in termly progress
meetings to discuss student performance there appeared to be a lack of formal structure to
this, a lack of detail in the recording of discussions and reasons for decisions and no
blueprinting of assessments against the learning outcomes.
The inspectors were disappointed that there was no documentation available to them that
provided an oversight of student performance and provided evidence that students had
demonstrated satisfactory communication skills and levels of professionalism.
As discussed above, the School must undertake work to ensure that the assessments used
within the programme are clearly blueprinted against the GDC learning outcomes. This will
assist in the School being assured and be able to provide clear evidence that each outcome
has been assessed on multiple occasions. Further work should be undertaken to link up and
formalise the assessment of several areas within the outcomes. For example, it was not clear
to the inspectors how assessments of students’ communication skills were considered across
the various clinical areas, including the specialty teaching areas. Having multiple sources of
data will help improve the reliability of assessment.
Although the School does take multiple samples of performance, there was no evidence
supplied to explain how these samples of performance are coordinated or triangulated. This
means that this Requirement is Partly Met.
Requirement 26: The standard expected of students in each area to be assessed must
be clear and students and staff involved in assessment must be aware of this standard
(Requirement Partly Met)
Expectations of students are outlined in the student handbooks and the University assessment
guidelines. The students that the inspectors met stated that they were happy with the
information provided regarding assessments and were able to easily refer to the guidance
provided.
Staff and students were aware of the general expectations of them and there seemed to be an
assumed standard that students were assessed against, which was relative to the stage of the
programme. It was acknowledged by students that there was some variation in marking, but
there was also an understanding that this will sometimes happen. Students told the panel that
they were pleased to be provided with written information about the assessment criteria and
that it was explained to them how assessments would be marked. This included the continuous
clinical assessments, where there was understanding of the two grading schemes used (the 5
point scale (A-E) and proficient, competent, learner, beginner, observer). The students
confirmed that it is always explained to them why they have received a particular grade. They

also told the inspectors that they liked the revision sessions before examinations. However, as
discussed above, further work must be undertaken to ensure that the standard that is set is
demonstrably the right standard, particularly for the summative assessments.
The inspectors noted that some of the grading is based on ‘assumed’ standards by an
experienced professional, rather than any absolute standard. In the final examinations, where
a candidate had scored a ‘D’ grade, which is a compensatable fail, it was felt that on occasion
the ‘safe beginner’ standard should have been referenced in the examiners’ discussions.
For the reasons outlined above, and under Requirement 23, the inspectors determined that
this Requirement was Partly Met.

Actions
No
16

Action required
The provider must ensure that all handbooks are in a consistent
format

Due date
Annual
monitoring
2015

16

The provider must ensure that students are not be permitted to
proceed to the final assessments with a fail grade in either
continuous clinical assessment element, OR, the grading
criteria must confirm that the student possesses the requisite
knowledge and skills for safe practice

Update to
be provided
in advance
of the 2015
final
assessment

16, 17,
25

A blueprint that clearly maps assessments used in the BDS
programme against the learning outcomes from Preparing for
Practice must be developed and this blueprint should be
referenced when designing assessments

Update in
annual
monitoring
2015

16, 19

The provider must ensure that where a student has obtained
less than the stated minimum level of experience required in an
area, the reasons why progression has been permitted are
clearly recorded

Update to
be provided
in advance
of the 2015
final
assessment

18

The provider must modernise assessments, including all
elements of the final summative assessments, to ensure that
there are in line with current practice. In undertaking this task
independent educational advice should be sought

Update in
annual
monitoring
2015

18

There should be scope within the quality management systems
to routinely monitor the assessments used in the BDS to ensure
that they remain appropriate

n/a

19

Action must be taken to ensure that the patient supply across
paediatrics, endodontics and prosthodontics is sufficient to
enable all students gain enough experience to become fit to

Update to
be provided
in advance

practise as a safe beginner at graduation

of the 2015
final
assessment

19

An update must be provided to the GDC on the threats to
patient supply, including those arising from the move to the new
Dental Hospital and School building

Update in
annual
monitoring
2015

19

The provider must ensure that there is a system in place, such
as CAFS, that will collate student clinical experience and enable
it to be easily summarised and analysed to identify ‘gaps’ in
student experience

Update in
annual
monitoring
2015

20

Staff and students should be provided with clear guidance
regarding the use of CAFS as a tool to enable both feedback
and reflection

n/a

21

The provider must ensure that all examiners of high stakes
examinations are provided with training specific to the
assessment process to ensure a level of consistency through
calibration. Psychometric analysis post examination should be
undertaken to ensure this consistency between examining
teams

Update in
annual
monitoring
2015

22

External examiners must be able to undertake a quality
assurance role that will enable them to feedback on all elements
of the final assessments and the provider should encourage
critical appraisal from external examiners as part of this role

Update in
annual
monitoring
2015

22

The provider should consider the appointment of an external
examiner with previous experience of undertaking a quality
assurance role at other BDS examinations

n/a

23, 26

A clear action plan for the introduction of standard-setting in
summative assessments must be agreed without delay. This
action plan should include the appointment of an assessment
lead

Action plan
to be
submitted
to the GDC
by March
2015

23, 26

The criteria for determining the overall grade for continuous
clinical assessment elements must be explicit

Update to
be provided
in advance
of the 2015
final
assessment

24

An action plan for the collection and analysis of patient
feedback for the purposes of informing student assessment
must be developed and implemented

Update in
annual
monitoring
2015

25

Students’ communication skills and professionalism should be
formally recorded in a consistent manner across clinics to
increase the reliability of the information available

n/a

26

Examiners should discuss, as a matter of routine, whether a
student has demonstrated that they are fit to practise at the
level of a safe beginner if a borderline fail grade has been
awarded

n/a

Standard 4 – Equality and diversity
The provider must comply with equal opportunities and discrimination legislation and
practice. They must also advocate this practice to students
Requirements
Met
Partly Not
met
met
27. Providers must adhere to current legislation and best
practice guidance relating to equality and diversity

28. Staff will receive training on equality and diversity,
development and appraisal mechanisms will include this

29. Providers will convey to students the importance of
compliance with equality and diversity law and principles
of the four UK nations both during training and after they
begin practice

GDC comments
Requirement 27: Providers must adhere to current legislation and best practice
guidance relating to equality and diversity (Requirement Met)
The School provided the inspectors with copies of several documents relating to equality and
diversity, including the Trust policy on equality, diversity and human rights, the University of
Birmingham equality information report, policies on fairness and diversity and harassment and
bullying and the University code of practice on admissions.
The School is required to follow both the University and the Trust policies relating to equality
and diversity. Staff informed the inspectors that they have received no complaints regarding
equality and diversity issues for the BDS programme.
For students with a declared disability, support is provided from the central University
department. The student’s personal tutor receives details of their needs and undertakes a
review on at least an annual basis. A number of students may have non-declared disabilities,
which the inspectors were told tended to be picked up in the early stages of the programme.
Should a student require additional support or training, this is offered to them.

The inspectors were told that the gender and ethnic mix of the student cohort is monitored in
the central office and that although specific information is not kept by the school, it is given
feedback about this.
The College currently holds a ‘Bronze Award’ for Athena Swan and is seeking to achieve a
‘Silver Award’ in the near future. There is also a significant amount of work being undertaken in
widening participation to help students from disadvantaged areas apply to the University.
The inspectors found that this Requirement was Met.
Requirement 28: Staff will receive training on equality and diversity, development and
appraisal mechanisms will include this (Requirement Met)
The inspectors were told that equality and diversity training is monitored centrally. School staff
are required to undertake mandatory on-line diversity training and the inspectors were told that
there was 100% compliance with this. The training is also completed by new staff members as
part of the induction process. Staff employed by the Trust must also complete mandatory
training. The inspectors noted that the School is working with the Trust to provide a complete
on-line training package for all students and University staff, which will include equality and
diversity training.
All staff who are involved in the student admissions process undergo mandatory equality and
diversity training and the School has recently introduced specific training for all those
interviewing in ‘unconscious bias’.
The inspectors were told that part-time staff are subject to the personal development review
process, but it was more limited in scope to just re-confirming that they can and should
continue with their role, though assured the inspectors that it could be expanded if required.
No evidence was supplied that linked this with appraisal or development, though the inspectors
were given verbal assurance that appraisals would pick-up whether this training had been
completed.
The inspectors found that this Requirement was Met.

Requirement 29: Providers will convey to students the importance of compliance with
equality and diversity law and principles of the four UK nations both during training and
after they begin practice (Requirement Met)
The inspectors noted from the evidence provided that students receive a specific lecture on
culture and oral health, and are required to undertake an assessed presentation on culture and
health in the behavioural science module.
Staff told the inspection panel that in the first two years of the BDS programme students are
taught about healthcare ethics and law, disability studies, behavioural science, communication,
culture and inequalities. In Year Two students learn about the Equality Act 2010 and students
are assessed on the relevant UK legislation in place. In addition, it is highlighted to students
that there are different rules and legislation in place according to where practice is taking place
and that they have an obligation to make themselves familiar with the local policies and
protocols.
The students told the panel that they received introductory lectures on equality and diversity
law and principles, where they are taught about disability and protected characteristics. The

students also told the inspectors that they are taught not to discriminate against colleagues or
patients and that they should embrace the fact that they are treating people and working with a
diverse team of people with differences and that they should make the most of these
differences and the different lifestyles that individuals have chosen. The inspectors were told
by several students interviewed that equality and diversity principles are reinforced in clinical
practice.
The inspectors agreed that this Requirement was Met.
Actions
No
-

Action required
None

Due date
n/a

Summary of Actions
No

Action

Observations

Due date

Response from Provider
5

The provider should consider how to ensure that all
part-time and outreach staff remain trained for their
role

The annual staff development days and monitoring
visits to outreach placements identify and address
training needs for staff.

n/a

All staff have access to the ecourse (online learning
environment) which contains the core teaching
resources for each subject, ensuring all teachers are
informed of the current material required to be taught.
7

The provider must ensure that systems are in place to
record the action taken in response to patient safety
issues that have been identified and that these
systems report into the School committee structure

We shall ensure that actions taken in response to
patient safety issues are recorded. The mechanism for
this will be included as part of the Quality Manual
review.

Annual monitoring
2015

8

The provider must ensure that the student fitness to
practise documentation provides clear and
comprehensive guidance and thresholds that address
all stages of the process

We are currently reviewing the student fitness to
practise documentation to ensure that explicit guidance
about all stages of the process is in place.

Annual monitoring
2015

9

The proposed QA manual must be implemented as
soon as possible and should include reference to all
relevant committees and provide direction for the
content and structure of minutes of meetings

The Quality Manual is being reviewed and revised to
reference all relevant committees.

Annual monitoring
2015

A specific committee or group with responsibility for
assessment should be introduced into the committee

The existing standard-setting panel will form the basis
for a group with responsibility for assessment

9

Standardisation of committee terms of reference and
structure of minutes will be incorporated.
n/a

structure
10

The School should ensure that the process for quality
assuring placements is documented in the proposed
Quality Manual

This is already contained within the manual. The
relevant section will be made more prominent.

n/a

10

Outreach training should be strengthened by making
attendance at development days mandatory for
outreach trainers or by visiting placements to observe
the training and supervision taking place

Outreach training will include a compulsory observation
during 2015-16, and subject to outcomes, will move to
a two yearly cycle. Attendance at development days
will be strongly encouraged and non-attendees may
undergo an additional peer observation to ensure
development needs are met

n/a

11

The provider must ensure that there is clear reporting
of actions taken in response to problems identified
under the quality management framework. All
problems should be monitored and reported on until
they are resolved

The Quality Manual revisions will make it more obvious
how actions are progressed. Action logs will be kept
and monitored regularly to ensure prompt action is
taken.

Annual monitoring
2015

13

The University and School should consider whether it
would be more beneficial for the BDS programme if it
was subject to fewer, but more thorough, internal
reviews

With HE review on the horizon, this is unlikely to
change. The programme has been caught between a
changeover in institutional process which has meant
slightly more frequent reviews as the reporting cycles
settle. We do not anticipate this to be a longer term
problem.

n/a

14

The provider must review its use of external examiners
in the final BDS assessments, with the aim of ensuring
that a more comprehensive quality assurance role is
achieved

This historically common practice has been in place for
many years and some dental schools still maintain this
practice. However, we are very happy to conform more
to this. We shall write to our external examiners for
2014/15 to confirm the expectations of their role for
the future.

Update to be
provided in
advance of the
2015 final
assessment

15

The School must ensure that there is a system in place
to record and monitor actions taken in relation to
concerns raised and development points from reports
received

We shall undertake a one-off exercise to review reports
since the 2008 School Quality Review. This activity will
be overseen in the longer term by a small Quality
Committee which reports into the School Education
Committee.

Annual monitoring
2015

16

The provider must ensure that all handbooks are in a
consistent format

The School has already undertaken some work to align
handbooks. This will continue ready for the forthcoming
academic year.

Annual
monitoring 2015

16

The provider must ensure that students are not be
permitted to proceed to the final assessments with a
fail grade in either continuous clinical assessment
element, OR, the grading criteria must confirm that the
student possesses the requisite knowledge and skills
for safe practice

The School has implemented a change in regulations
for the forthcoming final assessment. A fail grade in
any element of clinical assessment will result in a
student being deferred from sitting final BDS.

Update to be
provided in
advance of the
2015 final
assessment

16, 17,
25

A blueprint that clearly maps assessments used in the
BDS programme against the learning outcomes from
Preparing for Practice must be developed and this
blueprint should be referenced when designing
assessments

The blueprint which maps BDS assessments against the
learning outcomes from Preparing for Practice is under
development and will be consulted when designing
assessments.

Update in annual
monitoring 2015

16, 19

The provider must ensure that where a student has
obtained less than the stated minimum level of
experience required in an area, the reasons why
progression has been permitted are clearly recorded

In Periodontology the minimum requirement of 7 RSD
sessions is achieved by 100% of students as
demonstrated for the last 5 years. Students are told to
aim for 10 sessions as we do not encourage “minimal
experience”. In future students will be clearly advised
that the minimum experience is 7 RSD sessions, but that
this will only allow them to achieve 50%. Those
achieving greater experience will have access to a

Update to be
provided in
advance of the
2015 final
assessment

higher grade.
18

The provider must modernise assessments, including
all elements of the final summative assessments, to
ensure that there are in line with current practice. In
undertaking this task independent educational advice
should be sought

The School realises the need to ensure that assessments
are appropriate to their purpose, the methods are
supported by robust evidence and that they are
conducted appropriately. This will include making some
changes to the final summative assessments. We shall
seek independent educational advice prior to making
changes and implementing them.

18

There should be scope within the quality management
systems to routinely monitor the assessments used in
the BDS to ensure that they remain appropriate

This will be addressed as part of the assessment group / n/a
panel.

19

Action must be taken to ensure that the patient supply
across paediatrics, endodontics and prosthodontics is
sufficient to enable all students gain enough
experience to become fit to practise as a safe beginner
at graduation

The School and Hospital have been working in a variety
of ways to ensure sufficient appropriate patients for
students.

An update must be provided to the GDC on the threats
to patient supply, including those arising from the move
to the new Dental Hospital and School building

Work has taken place to identify the proportion of
patients who may be deterred from attending once the
Hospital and School have moved to a new location.
Only 25% of current patients indicated this was the
case. However, the majority of patients that the
students see in Speciality clinics are referred by dental
practitioners. In Perio and Prosthetics 100% of student
patients are referred; In Endodontics 70% of patients
are referred and in Paediatric Dentistry 60% of patients

19

It has recently been agreed that there will be a
separate referral pathway for student patients, which
should help to address the situation.

Update in annual
monitoring 2015

Update to be
provided in
advance of the
2015 final
assessment

Update in annual
monitoring 2015

are referred.
Work is taking place at the Restorative and the
Paediatric MCNs to develop systems for referring
patients.
19

The provider must ensure that there is a system in
place, such as CAFS, that will collate student clinical
experience and enable it to be easily summarised and
analysed to identify ‘gaps’ in student experience

CAFS is now operational for years 3 and 4 of the BDS
programme. There has been a slight delay to the rollout to year 5 due to the introduction of the electronic
dental record. However, CAFS will be used throughout
the clinical BDS programme commencing September
2015. This will enable student experience to be collated
and analysed across all clinical disciplines. It will also
allow a more detailed review of each student’s clinical
work.

Update in annual
monitoring 2015

20

Staff and students should be provided with clear
guidance regarding the use of CAFS as a tool to
enable both feedback and reflection

Students and staff are being supported in their use of
CAFS on clinics. Supporting guidance is being written.

n/a

21

The provider must ensure that all examiners of high
stakes examinations are provided with training specific
to the assessment process to ensure a level of
consistency through calibration. Psychometric analysis
post examination should be undertaken to ensure this
consistency between examining teams

The assessment lead and group will be setting up
mandatory training sessions for all such current
examiners and their successors which will be repeated
at intervals. This will include instruction on itemwriting, assessment methods, blueprinting, marking
and most importantly, calibration of examiners.
Examination data will be subject to analysis to monitor
the quality of examinations in terms of reliability,
validity and acceptability, and of the examiners as
regards consistency and level. The advice of a
psychometrician will be used to guide these processes.

Update in annual
monitoring 2015

22

External examiners must be able to undertake a quality
assurance role that will enable them to feedback on all
elements of the final assessments and the provider
should encourage critical appraisal from external
examiners as part of this role

We are changing the role of our external examiners for
the forthcoming finals assessment. This will ensure that
they principally have an observational role and have
time to meet together as a team to discuss all aspects
of finals.

Update in annual
monitoring 2015

22

The provider should consider the appointment of an
external examiner with previous experience of
undertaking a quality assurance role at other BDS
examinations

The external examining team include a number of
external examiners who have undertaken a QA role at
other BDS examinations

n/a

23, 26

A clear action plan for the introduction of standardsetting in summative assessments must be agreed
without delay. This action plan should include the
appointment of an assessment lead

A formal standard-setting process will be introduced for
the finals examinations in 2015.

Action plan to be
submitted to the
GDC by March
2015

23, 26

The criteria for determining the overall grade for
continuous clinical assessment elements must be
explicit

The criteria are determined on a competency scale and
are included in the relevant student handbooks.

Update to be
provided in
advance of the
2015 final
assessment

24

An action plan for the collection and analysis of patient
feedback for the purposes of informing student
assessment must be developed and implemented

Patient feedback is being collected via CAFS. An action
plan is being developed for using this to inform student
assessment.

Update in annual
monitoring 2015

25

Students’ communication skills and professionalism
should be formally recorded in a consistent manner
across clinics to increase the reliability of the
information available

Students’ communication skills and professionalism are
formally recorded via CAFS. This is being used
throughout years 3 and 4 currently and will be used for
students in year 5 in the forthcoming academic year.

n/a

This builds on the standard-setting processes which
have been introduced elsewhere in the BDS programme
successfully. An action plan is being written and an
assessment lead has been appointed.

26

Examiners should discuss, as a matter of routine,
whether a student has demonstrated that they are fit to
practise at the level of a safe beginner if a borderline
fail grade has been awarded

If a borderline fail grade has been given, examiners
discuss whether the student is able to pass the final
examination by compensation.

n/a

If an E grade has been given, the student is not safe and
will fail the final examination.

Observations from the provider on content of report
Provider to record observations here

Recommendation on sufficiency
The inspectors recommend that this programme is sufficient for registration as a dentist with the General Dental Council:
Yes

No

