INSPECTION REPORT
Education Provider /
Awarding Body:

University of Bristol, School of Oral & Dental
Sciences

Programme / Award /
Qualification:

Bachelor of Dental Surgery (BDS)

Remit and Purpose:

Full inspection referencing the Standards for
Education to determine the continuing
sufficiency of the award for the purpose of
registration with the GDC as a dentist

Learning Outcomes:

Preparing for Practice (Dentist)

Programme Inspection Dates:

28 & 29 April 2014

Examination Inspection
Dates:

10 & 11 June 2014

Inspection Panel:

Katie Carter (Chair and Lay Member)
Paul Howlett (Dentist Member)
Shiv Pabary (Dentist Member)
Paul Wright (Dentist Member) (Programme only)

GDC Staff:

Peter Butler (Lead)
Kathryn Counsell-Hubbard (Programme only)

Outcome:

Recommended that the Bristol BDS Programme
remains sufficient for registration as a dentist

Inspection summary
The BDS at Bristol benefits from a strong, cohesive staff team providing excellent support for
students studying in all years.
Aspects of the programme which the panel felt to be of particular note included the emphasis
placed by the School on issues regarding equality and diversity. The School has achieved a
silver Athena Swan award and is rightly proud of this achievement.
Students praised the feedback they receive from supervisors while at the Dental Hospital
and during outreach placements. When students perform especially well, they receive a
personal letter of commendation from the Dean of the School which the panel thought was
likely to be well received and a good morale booster. There were, however, some reports
from students that feedback was insufficiently detailed with grades only provided. There is
work here that the School could do to achieve greater consistency in the level of detail in the
feedback provided. Similarly, students told the inspectors that supervision could vary across
locations and greater consistency needs to be achieved in this area, too. The panel felt that
there were fairly limited opportunities for students to gain experience of working with other
members of the dental team. Students would clearly benefit from an improvement to this
aspect of the programme.
The transition from working in the simulated clinical environment to working with real patients
is managed well by the School and there are clear and comprehensive procedures for
gathering patient consent. Students were complimentary about their experiences in
outreach, the Staff Student Liaison Committee and use of Blackboard. Information given to
patients about treatment given by undergraduates is also clear and detailed although there
was some room for improvement in these areas. The panel was especially impressed by the
willingness of senior staff, and the School as whole, to listen and respond to constructive
criticism about the programme in a positive manner.
The main criticisms the inspectors would make about the programme centre around
recording of clinical data and monitoring of student performance via the Progress
Committee. Clinical data seen by the panel was not as consistent and reliable as it could and
should have been and the School must seek to make improvements as soon as possible.
The panel found that decisions and recommendations made by the Progress Committee
were not noted and followed up at subsequent meetings making the task of auditing
judgments more difficult.

Inspection process and purpose of Inspection
1.

As part of its duty to protect patients and promote high standards within the professions
it regulates, the General Dental Council (GDC) quality assures the education and
training of student dentists and dental care professionals (DCPs) at institutions whose
qualifications enable the holder to apply for registration with the GDC and new
qualifications where it is intended that the qualification will lead to registration.

2.

The aim of this quality assurance activity is to ensure that these institutions produce a
new registrant who has demonstrated, on graduation, that he or she has met the
outcomes required for registration with the GDC. This is to ensure that students who
obtain a qualification leading to registration are fit to practise at the level of a safe
beginner.

3.

The inspection focuses on four Standards, with a total of 29 underlying Requirements.
These are contained in the document Standards for Education.

4.

The purpose of this inspection was to make a recommendation to the Council of the
GDC regarding the ‘sufficiency’ of the programme for registration as a dentist in the UK.
The GDC’s powers are derived under Part II, Section 9 of the Dentists Act 1984 (as
amended) to determine sufficiency of the programme.

5.

Inspection reports may highlight areas of strength and draw attention to areas requiring
improvement and development, including actions that are required to be undertaken by
the provider. Where an action is needed for a Requirement to be met, the term ‘must’ is
used to describe the obligation on the provider to undertake this action. For these
actions the inspectors may stipulate a specific timescale by which the action must be
completed or when an update on progress must be provided. In their observations on
the content of the report, the provider should confirm the anticipated date by which
these actions will be completed. Where an action would improve how a Requirement is
met, the term ‘should’ is used and for these actions there will be no due date stipulated.
Providers will be asked to report on the progress in addressing the required actions
through the annual monitoring process. Serious concerns about a lack of progress may
result in further inspections or other quality assurance activity.

6.

The provider of the qualification has the opportunity to provide factual corrections on the
draft report. Following the production of the final report the provider is asked to submit
observations on, or objections to, the report and the actions listed. Where the inspection
panel have recommended that the programme is sufficient for registration, the Council
of the GDC have delegated responsibility to the GDC Registrar to consider the
recommendations of the panel. Should an inspection panel not be able to recommend
sufficiency, the report and observations would be presented to the Council of the GDC
for consideration.

The Inspection
7.

This report sets out the findings of an inspection of the Bachelor of Dental Surgery
awarded by University of Bristol, School of Oral and Dental Sciences. The GDC
publication Standards for Education (version 1.0 November 2012) was used as a
framework for the inspection. This inspection forms part of a series BDS inspections
being undertaken by the GDC 2012-2014.

8.

The inspection comprised two visits. The first, referred to as the programme inspection,
was carried out on 28 and 29 April 2014. This involved a series of meetings with
programme staff involved in the management, delivery and assessment of the
programme and a selection of BDS students. The second part of the inspection took
place on 10 and 11 June 2014 and involved an observation of elements of the Final
examination and the Final Examination Board meeting.

9.

The report contains the findings of the inspection panel across the two inspections and
with consideration to supporting documentation prepared by the School to evidence,
how the individual Requirements under the Standards for Education have been met.

Overview of Qualification
10. The School of Oral and Dental Sciences at the University of Bristol is one of three within
the Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry. The BDS programme has an intake of around 70
students each year. The programme was restructured in the academic year 2012-13
and comprises 23 units based around six key themes of health sciences, human
disease, dental skills, primary care dentistry, advanced care dentistry and personal and
professional development. Each unit must be passed in order to progress.

Evaluation of Qualification against the Standards for Education
11. As stated above, the Standards for Education were used as a framework for this
inspection. Consideration was given to the fact that these Standards were approved in
late 2012 and that it may take time for providers to make amendments to programmes
to fully meet all of the Requirements under the Standards and to gather the evidence to
demonstrate that each Requirement is being met. The inspection panel were fully aware
of this and the findings of this report should be read with this in mind.
12. The provider was requested to undertake a self-evaluation of the programme against
the individual Requirements under the Standards for Education. This involved stating
whether each Requirement is met, partly met or not met and to provide evidence in
support of their evaluation. The inspection panel examined this evidence, requested
further documentary evidence and gathered further evidence from discussions with staff
and students.
13. The inspection panel used the following descriptors to reach a decision on the extent to
which the University of Bristol, School of Oral and Dental Sciences BDS meets each
Requirement:
A Requirement is met if:
“There is sufficient appropriate evidence derived from the inspection process. This
evidence provides the inspectors with broad confidence that the provider demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students is supportive
of documentary evidence and the evidence is robust, consistent and not contradictory.
There may be minor deficiencies in the evidence supplied but these are likely to be
inconsequential.”
A Requirement is partly met if:
“Evidence derived from the inspection process is either incomplete or lacks detail and, as
such, fails to convince the inspection panel that the provider fully demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students may not fully
support the evidence submitted or there may be contradictory information in the evidence
provided. There is, however, some evidence of compliance and it is likely that either (a) the
appropriate evidence can be supplied in a short time frame, or, (b) any deficiencies
identified can be addressed and evidenced in the annual monitoring process.”
A Requirement is not met if:
“The provider cannot provide evidence to demonstrate a Requirement or the evidence
provided is not convincing. The information gathered at the inspection through meetings
with staff and students does not support the evidence provided or the evidence is
inconsistent and/or incompatible with other findings. The deficiencies identified are such as
to give rise to serious concern and will require an immediate action plan from the provider.

The consequences of not meeting a Requirement in terms of the overall sufficiency of a
programme will depend upon the compliance of the provider across the range of
Requirements and the possible implications for public protection.

Standard 1 – Protecting patients
Providers must be aware of their duty to protect the public. Providers must ensure that
patient safety is paramount and care of patients is of an appropriate standard. Any risk
to the safety of patients and their care by students must be minimised
Requirements
Met
Partly Not
met
met
1. Students will provide patient care only when they have
demonstrated adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical
procedures, the student should be assessed as competent in
the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients
2. Patients must be made aware that they are being treated by
students and give consent
3. Students will only provide patient care in an environment
which is safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with
relevant legislation and requirements regarding patient care
4. When providing patient care and services, students are to be
supervised appropriately according to the activity and the
student’s stage of development.
5. Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained.
Clinical supervisors must have appropriate general or
specialist registration with a regulatory body
6. Students and those involved in the delivery of education and
training must be encouraged to raise concerns if they identify
any risks to patient safety
7. Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be
taken by the provider
8. Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and
apply as required. The content and significance of the student
fitness to practise procedures must be conveyed to students
and aligned to GDC student fitness to practise guidance. Staff
involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar
with the GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance.
GDC comments
Requirement 1: Students will provide patient care only when they have demonstrated
adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical procedures, the student should be
assessed as competent in the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients (Requirement Met)
The BDS programme was restructured for the academic year 2012-13 with the aim of ensuring
that students are at the level of a safe beginner at the end of the programme and that they
have been assessed appropriately to ensure this is the case. Previously, the programme had
worked on the basis of 2 years’ pre-clinical theory work followed by 3 years’ clinical practice.
This was a common set-up for dental training. The new structure provides greater rigour in
ensuring students are competent and all modules within a given year of study must be passed
in order for students to be eligible to progress to the next year of study.

There is a far clearer journey towards clinical practice demonstrated by the restructured set-up
of the programme. The early units of the programme tend to cover what might be viewed as
the more ‘traditional’ topics such as anatomy and oral biology. The School feels the set-up
provides students with a firm base to build upon and a full understanding of the fundamental
underpinning science of dentistry before they commence treating patients.
The Introduction to Clinic course covers manual handling of equipment, communication skills,
and record keeping and so on. Practical work commences at a more basic level before
building up to handling more complex or invasive procedures. In the case of Paediatric
Dentistry, for example, this would involve visiting local schools in order to practise their
communication skills specifically with children. They might then progress to completing fissure
sealants before moving on to deal with tooth trauma. This format is employed across topics
and works well.
Skills students have acquired via the Clinical Skills Laboratory will then be undertaken on clinic
but on phantom heads providing an additional level of protection prior to allowing students
treat patients.
All patients are screened, as students progress through the programme, to ensure that they
are not given a case which is beyond their capabilities.
Students met by the inspectors clearly felt that, despite the restructure of the programme, an
earlier introduction to working on clinics with patients would be beneficial. They were aware of
other BDS programmes where this is the case and felt that they were, in some ways, at a
disadvantage. They did feel that they were robustly assessed prior to commencing work with
patients and feel that the transition to clinical practice is well managed by staff. Students have
welcomed the opportunity to observe 2nd year students working in the Clinical Skills Laboratory
to learn more about how to place rubber dams and other similar, basic procedures at an early
point in the programme.
Requirement 2: Patients must be made aware that they are being treated by students
and give consent (Requirement Met)
Prospective patients looking for information regarding available treatments on the Bristol
Dental Hospital website will find clear details setting out how they will interact with trainee
dentists. Any patient coming in ‘off the street’ for treatment as a ‘walk-in’ patient must
complete a set of pre-treatment forms which describe how students are involved.
Appointment letters sent to patients also highlight the fact that treatments will be undertaken
by supervised undergraduates. Posters displayed around the site also give details about
students. The inspectors felt that these various forms of information were a clear and
effective means of keeping patients well-informed.
However, the inspectors could not fully understand the colour scheme system which has
been implemented for student tunics which seemed to be more complicated than was,
perhaps, necessary. Each Year Group is issued with a different colour tunic when they
commence the course and these are kept throughout their time at the School. The colour of
tunic represents the year of entry to the programme rather than their year group. The
inspectors felt it would be better if all students wore the same colour tunics or each year of
the course is assigned a different colour in order to avoid confusion. Staff we spoke with
seemed to find the system a little confusing, too, so the panel remained unsure as to who
was benefitting from the differentiation in colours. Further to this, students interviewed during
the inspection felt that the coloured tunics caused confusion for patients. Beyond this,
though, the inspectors felt that the School worked hard to make sure students are easily

identifiable. Students the inspectors spoke with felt comfortable with consent procedures and
told the panel that they are taught to always introduce themselves as students and to explain
which stage of the programme they are at.
The inspectors were told that the School had attempted to develop a consent form which
could be used across all clinical locations thereby providing a consistent approach to taking
and recording patient consent. Currently, there are different forms for different locations.
Unfortunately, this has not been possible and the inspectors felt this was disappointing. The
School continues to work on a form which is generic to some extent whilst also includes area
specific content. The panel agree that this will be a step in the right direction.
In general, the inspectors agreed that the information supplied in advance of the inspection
was clear and comprehensive.
Requirement 3: Students will only provide patient care in an environment which is safe
and appropriate. The provider must comply with relevant legislation and requirements
regarding patient care (Requirement Met)
Since the last GDC inspection, a major refurbishment of the facilities has taken place. The
panel were impressed by the high standard of the facilities available to the students. The
majority of the clinical work undertaken by the students on the Bristol BDS programme takes
place within the Bristol Dental Hospital which falls under the clinical governance of the
University Hospitals Bristol (UHBristol). Students complete mandatory training provided by
UHBristol which covers clinical governance guidelines. Annual health and safety audits are
carried out according to Trust regulations. Part of the audit is to ensure that staff are complying
with up-to-date policies in relation to incident reporting, risk assessment and so on.
Health and safety and infection control policies are taught carefully to the students from Year
Two as they begin to work with patients on clinics. The School treats these aspects of training
very seriously.
Requirement 4: When providing patient care and services, students are to be
supervised appropriately according to the activity and the student’s stage of
development (Requirement Met)
The School has developed and implemented policies and procedures together with a Code of
Practice for supervisors. These all provide a wealth of guidance on how students should be
supervised according to their stage in the programme and the panel felt that this was good
practice.
Students who met with the inspectors were largely complimentary regarding the levels of
support they received, particularly during outreach placements. Supervisors here were
perceived as being particularly helpful to students. However, there were some comments
relating to variation of experience depending on which clinic they were working. Some
students felt that particular clinics had a more stressful atmosphere than others and that there
could be longer waits to see a supervisor. Students felt they received better supervision while
in outreach placements. They acknowledge, though, that this was largely because they are
working in smaller groups here and, therefore, receive more one-on-one attention than is,
perhaps, possible within the dental school clinics. The inspectors feel that work could be done
here by the School to improve student experience across locations.
Personal tutors are available to students to discuss any issues with their development and
training. Most students told the inspectors that they made use of a wide range of staff,
including personal tutors, who they consulted regarding academic and pastoral problems.

Requirement 5: Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained. Clinical
supervisors must have appropriate general or specialist registration with a regulatory
body (Requirement Met)
The School is committed to providing development opportunities to supervising staff. Many are
undertaking the completion of teaching qualifications although this is not currently mandatory.
Supervisors, including those based in outreach, told the panel that the School frequently
organises sessions where different clinical scenarios are worked through in order to calibrate
grading and to ensure parity of experience for students. Part-time staff told the inspectors that
they felt thoroughly integrated into the programme as a whole. Part-time staff are also included
in educational away-days and calibration sessions. There is no formal induction process for
new outreach staff although this is being planned.
Annual appraisals help to identify any training requirements so staff maintain their experience
levels.
Requirement 6: Students and those involved in the delivery of education and training
must be encouraged to raise concerns if they identify any risks to patient safety
(Requirement Met)
Clear and transparent policies are in place. The inspectors had sight of documentation relating
to raising concerns and whistleblowing as part of the pre-inspection material supplied by the
School. Students are encouraged to raise concerns and the School feels that this
encouragement works to minimise stress when concerns do need to be raised. There are online forms that are available for staff and students to complete should they have a concern
they wish to raise and when the inspectors asked students about these forms they were aware
of their existence and purpose. Students are also aware that they can approach their clinical
supervisors or, indeed, the Dean of the School should they need.
Students keep the same personal tutor throughout their time at the Bristol Dental School and
they are able to discuss concerns via this channel although students reported that they often
prefer to approach another, trusted member of staff rather than their assigned personal tutor.
Requirement 7: Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be taken by
the provider (Requirement Met)
A Clinical Incident Policy is in place and is managed by the Trust. The policy requires analysis
of any incident within 72 hours so that any necessary escalation of action can be carried out in
a timely fashion. When an untoward clinical incident takes place, a root cause analysis must
also be carried out so that any learning points can be taken forward.
The Clinical Governance Committee meets on a quarterly basis in order to consider incidents
which have occurred and any actions which might be necessary as a result. The Head of
School sits on this Committee and this means feedback comes directly back to the School and
can be disseminated to staff and to the student body. In outreach settings, staff supervising
students have received training in incident reporting. The inspectors were provided with
information relating to an incident which involved the incorrect extraction of a tooth and how
this was handled.
The panel were pleased to learn that the School has a clear understanding of the need to
encourage what they describe as a climate of transparency. There is a clear recognition of the
duty of candour required when handling untoward clinical incidents.
However, the panel found it difficult to understand how students interact with the Clinical
Incident Policy and there is a lack of information on clinical incident reporting in the written

guidance available to students. The School should give some thought to improvements in this
area.
Requirement 8: Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and apply as
required. The content and significance of the student fitness to practise procedures
must be conveyed to students and aligned to GDC student fitness to practise guidance.
Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar with the GDC Student
Fitness to Practise Guidance (Requirement Met)
The School keeps a central log of issues relating to student professionalism. The panel were
told that the most common issues recorded relate to attendance and sickness absence.
Student support handbooks make the School’s expectations around professionalism and
Fitness to Practise (FtP) clear to students. This information is available to students via the
online Blackboard learning environment. The Pre-Clinical Dean also writes to new students
outlining expectations about behaviour and professionalism in general as well as asking that
they read the GDC’s Student Fitness to Practise guidance. The students must confirm, by
completing a form, that they have read the document and understood the examples of
behaviours likely to lead to concern. Students met by the inspection team stated that
professionalism is a strong component of the BDS programme. Indeed, learning about
professional behaviour starts in week one with lectures as part of the initial introductory week
provided to new students. Students told the inspectors that they felt they had a good grasp of
what it means to be a professional and the inspectors certainly gained a sense of this through
their discussions with student groups.
The Progress Committee looks at each student from both an academic and professional
standpoint at the end of each term. If the Progress Committee finds a student is falling below
the expected standard, they can be referred to their Personal Tutor or to the Clinical Dean for
an interview. A student concern form may also be completed. The Progress Committee
consideration of these issues allows staff from across all disciplines to monitor any low level or
consistent behaviours which may be emerging or developing.
The FtP processes employed by the School fall in line with those implemented by the Medical
School. Most of the issues dealt with via the procedures relate to health and medical issues
and usually result in students being referred to occupational health or for pastoral support.
The School seeks to deal with issues at an early stage to avoid the need to instigate formal
proceedings. The inspectors gained a real sense that staff deal with any problems with tact
and efficiency. However, the panel felt that part-time staff needed to be made more aware of
the FtP procedures and their importance.
All relevant documents, handbooks, forms and policies, including those published by the GDC,
are available to staff and students via the intranet.
Actions
Req.
Number

Actions for the provider

Due date
(if applicable)

1

The School should investigate the feasibility of introducing
students onto clinics at an earlier stage in the programme

N/A

2

The School should look at making the colour scheme for student
tunics clearer

N/A

4

The School should work to improve the consistency of
experience for students across all locations with particular
reference to supervision and feedback

N/A

7

The School should give thought to ways of improving students
understanding of the Clinical Incident Policy

N/A

8

Part-time staff should be made more aware of the School’s FtP
procedures and their importance

N/A

Standard 2 – Quality evaluation and review of the programme
The provider must have in place effective policy and procedures for the monitoring and
review of the programme
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
9. The provider will have a framework in place that details how it
manages the quality of the programme which includes
making appropriate changes to ensure the curriculum
continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and
adapts to changing legislation and external guidance. There
must be a clear statement about where responsibility lies for
this function
10. The provider will have systems in place to quality assure
placements
11. Any problems identified through the operation of the quality
management framework must be addressed as soon as
possible
12. Should quality evaluation of the programme identify any
serious threats to the students achieving learning outcomes
through the programme, the GDC must be notified at the
earliest possible opportunity
13. Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external
quality assurance procedures
14. External examiners must be utilised and must be familiar with
the learning outcomes and their context. Providers should
follow QAA guidelines on external examining where
applicable
15. Providers must consider and, where appropriate, act upon
concerns raised or formal reports on the quality of education
and assessment
GDC comments
Requirement 9: The provider will have a framework in place that details how it manages
the quality of the programme which includes making appropriate changes to ensure the
curriculum continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and adapts to
changing legislation and external guidance. There must be a clear statement about
where responsibility lies for this function (Requirement Met)
The Dental Education Committee (DEC) oversees the QA of the BDS programme. The Dental
Teaching Committee (DTC) and Dental Assessment Committee (DAC) both feed in to the
DEC. The Head of School, with support from the Executive Committee, is responsible for the
daily operational management of the programme.
The key mechanism for internal monitoring of the quality of the BDS programme is the annual
programme review (APR) which looks at all aspects of the programme including all units of
study. Each unit lead will complete an assessment form for their particular unit and this feeds
in to the overall process. An element of peer review has been built in to the process whereby
unit leads will look at each other’s unit evaluations. This allows for a further level of scrutiny

whilst encouraging those involved with the delivery of the programme to widen their knowledge
of the programme as a whole and to contribute to its development as a whole.
The APR will also encompass an evaluation of useful documentation such as meeting
minutes, student feedback forms, student performance analyses and minor/major change
impact assessments. The School feel that the APR provides them with a robust method of
quality assuring a programme which needs regular development and enhancement. The
inspectors were impressed to learn that students receive a lecture on the outcomes of the
APR process so that they are informed about developments they have been instrumental in
bringing about.
The BDS programme has been fully mapped to the learning outcomes set out in the GDC’s
publication Preparing for Practice. Those students completing the programme in Summer
2014 will be the first Bristol graduates assessed against the updated GDC learning outcomes.
Requirement 10: The provider will have systems in place to quality assure placements
(Requirement Met)
All students undertake placements at South Bristol Community Hospital and at the Charlotte
Keele dental clinic. Students gain experience of Paediatric Dentistry at Charlotte Keele. Both
these locations are subject to the same UHBristol clinical governance policies as described
under Requirement 3.
Staff based in outreach clinics have all worked within the School previously and this helps to
ensure a consistency of approach in the delivery of teaching. Staff allocated to the South
Bristol Community Hospital were employed 18 months prior to its opening and they rotated
through most departments in advance of moving to the South Bristol site. This provided them
with the grounding they required in teaching and assessment of students. Some teaching staff
also teach, for part of the week, within the Dental School which also helps to maintain
consistency of teaching and grading. It was unclear to the panel whether such arrangements
would remain the case for any new members of staff joining outreach facilities.
Students find the outreach experience to be a highlight of the BDS programme and this is a
common finding at dental schools across the UK. They enjoy the experience of working more
like a general dental practitioner.
Requirement 11: Any problems identified through the operation of the quality
management framework must be addressed as soon as possible (Requirement Met)
The School told the inspection panel that both formal and informal processes are employed to
resolve problems and issues which arise. The variety of ways of responding to problems open
to the School mean they can act quickly if needed. As described elsewhere in this report, the
main mechanisms for managing issues and dealing with problems are the APR and the
Faculty Quality Enhancement Team (FQET). The School Executive Committee is also able
enact rapid change where this is required.
Students told the panel that the School had appeared to lack organisation and that this had
needed to be improved. This issue had been raised by the students and a marked
improvement had been noted. New handbooks had had a positive impact. However, despite
the panel being assured that the School could react quickly to issues raised, some students
still felt that change could often be very slow to happen. Students can raise issues and provide
feedback via their Personal Tutors, Unit Leads or the Clinical Dean. More formally, they can
utilise the Staff Student Liaison Committee and representatives attend DEC meetings. The
inspectors were also informed that students receive a lot of feedback in response to suggested
changes. They are able to see changes being made for those studying in the earlier years of

the programme. They felt that it was good that changes were made according to the feedback
they had provided but wanted a speedier response so that they might benefit from such
changes as well as those in earlier years. The inspectors feel that methods could be found to
introduce changes earlier, where possible, especially as the School’s own philosophy is to
resolve issues as quickly as possible. The Clinical Dean keeps detailed records of discussions
with students relating to any problems with the delivery of the programme. The School have
introduced Student Concern Forms and Staff Concern Forms so that all those involved with
the programme have an accessible and straightforward method of raising an issue.
The School were able to present to the inspectors a variety of examples of issues identified or
concerns which had been raised and dealt with through the quality management systems in
place. These included clarifying aspects of the programme causing confusion for students,
covering the activity of absent staff members and improving feedback mechanisms to include
online surveys. Students are kept up-to-date on developments via the ‘you said, we did’
section of the student newsletter. However, many of the students met by the panel of
inspectors stated that they did not read the newsletter and did not find it to be a useful
mechanism for communication.
The on-line Blackboard learning environment had been causing students some difficulties in
locating the information they needed. Students commented on this via the SSLC. The
inspectors were pleased to hear that there has been a resolution to these difficulties with
lecture notes being uploaded more promptly and being easier to locate. Many students
commented that Blackboard was now a very good resource.
Requirement 12: Should quality evaluation of the programme identify any serious
threats to the students achieving learning outcomes through the programme, the GDC
must be notified at the earliest possible opportunity (Requirement Met)
The DEC oversaw the mapping of the programme to the GDC learning outcomes set out in
Preparing for Practice. Appropriate Whistleblowing policies are in place and no instance of
students potentially failing to achieve learning outcomes has ever arisen. The School states
that they have provided full information via the GDC annual monitoring process which covers
threats to the programme. External Examiners are also asked to comment on this via their
reports. None have ever commented on students not meeting learning outcomes. The strength
of its Quality Management systems and its setting within a University framework are also cited
as strengths of the programme. There appears to be no mechanism though, other than annual
monitoring returns, whereby the GDC would be alerted should an issue of this type arise.
The School is managing with a fairly low level of staff in place in some areas. Staff levels have
been a historical issue for the School. A business case is being prepared outlining the need for
additional staff. The inspection panel supports this action and should be kept up-to-date with
how this action proceeds.
Requirement 13: Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external quality
assurance procedures (Requirement Met)
The School complies with University-wide rules, regulations and codes of practice. University
regulations require that all programme units must be contained within one academic year,
rather than spanning two or more years and this regulation, amongst other things, led to a
radical restructure of the BDS programme in 2012-13.
The FQET makes visits to the BDS programme and examines individual units. The APR,
which is carried out for all taught dental programmes on an annual basis, feeds in to this.
FQET Visit Teams are made up of members of staff from other Schools within the University
and this provides a viewpoint which is external to the programme itself. Part of the role of the

FQET is to ensure actions identified by the APR process are put in place as well as to highlight
aspects of good practice. The FQET requires an update report on progress after 6 months.
The Care Quality Commission (CQC) has not inspected any of the clinical facilities associated
with the BDS programme. The programme has not been the subject of a QAA review since
2004.
Details of External Examiner involvement with the BDS programme can be found under
Requirements 14 and 22.
Requirement 14: External examiners must be utilised and must be familiar with the
learning outcomes and their context. Providers should follow QAA guidelines on
external examining where applicable (Requirement Met)
External Examiners are seen as being an integral element of the programme; they are
appointed for a five-year period with the option to extend this for a further year if required.
Appointments are ratified by the DTC and DEC. The University provides a Code of Practice for
the use of External Examiners and this conforms to QAA guidelines. The Code of Practice is
currently under review to ensure it is up-to-date. External Examiners are appointed to cover a
particular topic, or group of topics forming part of the overall programme. The External
Examiners are given access to examination papers in advance and observe the clinical
examinations. At the end of the academic year, reports are produced and the School responds
to explain how any suggestions made within reports are being tackled and addressed.
Requirement 15: Providers must consider and, where appropriate, act upon concerns
raised or formal reports on the quality of education and assessment (Requirement Met)
External Examiners produce reports at the end of each academic year and these are replied
to by the School to show how issues raised are being addressed. The reports are shared at
both School level and centrally within the University. They are also looked at as part of the
APR. Formal reports on teaching quality and provision are also made via the APR. The
University carries out School Reviews every five or six years. These reviews take place to
ensure Schools are running efficiently and effectively and may identify where there is room
for improvement. The School has an opportunity to respond to the findings of the report.
The National Student Survey (NSS) results received on an annual basis can be particularly
helpful to the School and an action plan is drawn up every year as a means of responding to
what the NSS results reveal. The CQC has not, to date, looked at the clinical facilities used
by the School.
Year One students have reported to the School their view that the initial stages of the BDS
programme do not feel part of a dentistry course. The School told the inspectors that they
accepted this viewpoint and are working hard to make the first year more clinically relevant.
Staff feel that an increased focus on professionalism is helping improve matters. Students
are being offered the opportunity to observe more senior students working in the clinical skills
laboratory and assessments are being updated and developed to be more dentally relevant.
Further information regarding responding to issues and problems can be found under
Requirement 11.

Actions

Req.
Number

Actions for the provider

Due date
(if applicable)

11

The School should continue to investigate methods of
implementing changes at the earliest opportunity

N/A

12

The GDC should be kept up-to-date with the staffing situation
and any changes or developments in this area

Annual
monitoring
2015

Standard 3– Student assessment
Assessment must be reliable and valid. The choice of assessment method must be
appropriate to demonstrate achievement of the GDC learning outcomes. Assessors
must be fit to perform the assessment task
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
16. To award the qualification, providers must be assured that
students have demonstrated attainment across the full range
of learning outcomes, at a level sufficient to indicate they are
safe to begin practice. This assurance should be underpinned
by a coherent approach to aggregation and triangulation, as
well as the principles of assessment referred to in these
standards.
17. The provider will have in place management systems to plan,
monitor and record the assessment of students throughout
the programme against each of the learning outcomes
18. Assessment must involve a range of methods appropriate to
the learning outcomes and these should be in line with
current practice and routinely monitored, quality assured and
developed
19. Students will have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and will undertake each activity relating
to patient care on sufficient occasions to enable them to
develop the skills and the level of competency to achieve the
relevant GDC learning outcomes
20. The provider should seek to improve student performance by
encouraging reflection and by providing feedback1.
21. Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills,
experience and training to undertake the task of assessment,
appropriate general or specialist registration with a regulatory
body
22. Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent
to which assessment processes are rigorous, set at the
correct standard, ensure equity of treatment for students and
have been fairly conducted
23. Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear
criteria. Standard setting must be employed for summative
assessments
24. Where appropriate, patient/peer/customer feedback
should contribute to the assessment process
25. Where possible, multiple samples of performance must
be taken to ensure the validity and reliability of the
assessment conclusion

1

Reflective practice should not be part of the assessment process in a way that risks effective student use

26. The standard expected of students in each area to be
assessed must be clear and students and staff involved
in assessment must be aware of this standard
GDC comments
Requirement 16: To award the qualification, providers must be assured that students
have demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes, at a level
sufficient to indicate they are safe to begin practice. This assurance should be
underpinned by a coherent approach to aggregation and triangulation, as well as the
principles of assessment referred to in these standards (Requirement Met)
The BDS programme is clearly aligned to Preparing for Practice and this was demonstrated to
the panel of inspectors via pre-inspection documentation.
Students gain experience of working alongside dental nurses but also work in pairs with
younger BDS students to provide additional experience of four-handed dentistry. There are
limited opportunities to provide shared care with other members of the dental team. Students
are able to refer patients to dental hygienists and therapists but don’t always get to work
alongside them and the School recognises that shared care does not happen enough. There
are plans to locate dental hygienists and therapists with trainee dentists in outreach and the
GDC needs to be kept updated on how these plans develop together with the development of
further strategies to increase team working opportunities. In the meantime, the panel were
pleased to learn that students are provided with lectures regarding the remit of the various
dental team members as well as lectures on Scope of Practice and the implications of Direct
Access.
The inspectors noted that the programme has low attrition rates and were interested in what
the School’s perception of the reason for this might be. Senior staff told the inspectors that they
believed this might largely be explained by the restructure of the programme which allows for
more robust decision making at an earlier stage in the programme. Whilst Year Two, for
example, is felt to be particularly challenging, student progression into Year Three is good.
Requirement 17: The provider will have in place management systems to plan, monitor
and record the assessment of students throughout the programme against each of the
learning outcomes (Requirement Partly Met)
Monitoring of assessment structures falls under the remit of the DTC, DAC and, subsequently,
the DEC.
The School acknowledged that it is well behind many other dental schools in terms of the
development and use of an e-portfolio. The inspectors acknowledge that the School is taking
its time in order to ensure that the e-portfolio is implemented carefully so that it meets the
needs of all those required to use it. The e-portfolio is expected to include an increased focus
on reflection.
The Progress Committee currently meets every term and considers each student individually.
Minutes of the Progress Committee lacked sufficient detail to enable the inspection team to
understand fully the decision-making process and this was a cause for concern. Unit Leads are
not always able to attend each Progress Committee but, if they are unable to attend, they
submit information regarding students in advance of the meeting. Despite asking several times
for sight of an example of how this might take place, the panel were not provided with this.
Often, a delegated member of the relevant teaching team will attend in place of an absent Unit
Lead. Information submitted does not include summary sheets of students’ clinical experience
but the panel heard that robust evidence, which could be oral, is required to show that remedial

action is needed.
It was a concern to the inspectors that there seemed to be no follow-up of actions or recording
of actions undertaken in later minutes and the inspection panel felt that this would help in terms
of providing a clear audit trail for the progress of each student. Any action identified as being
required is followed up through a one-to-one meeting with the Clinical Dean and, if necessary,
the Unit Lead for the particular discipline in which the student has fallen behind. The Clinical
Dean maintains a record of actions agreed and undertaken but this does not appear to be
reported back to the Progress Committee. As such, the Progress Committee is unable to check
that decisions it makes are carried through.
Requirement 18: Assessment must involve a range of methods appropriate to the
learning outcomes and these should be in line with current practice and routinely
monitored, quality assured and developed (Requirement Met)
The School utilises both formative and summative assessments across the BDS programme to
test the domains set out in Preparing for Practice. A wide variety of assessment types are used
as part of the programme and these will include on-line e-assessments, multiple choice
question papers, extended matching question papers, single best answer papers, essays,
presentations and OSCEs. The inspectors felt the mix of assessments was appropriate.
Monitoring of assessments is overseen by the DAC, DTC and DEC. When the BDS
programme was restructured, all assessments were reviewed to ensure consistency of
approach.
The inspectors attended the BDS Final clinical examinations which took place on 10 June
2014. The panel felt the examination ran smoothly and was well organised. BDS finals also
have a written examination element which was not attended by the panel. When the panel
looked at scripts for the written papers, it became apparent that there were some small
inconsistencies in the recording of marks for the papers of which the School should be mindful.
Requirement 19: Students will have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and will undertake each activity relating to patient care on
sufficient occasions to enable them to develop the skills and the level of competency to
achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes (Requirement Partly Met)
Part of the reason for the 2012 restructure of the programme was to ensure the updated
learning outcomes which had been published by the GDC were incorporated into the
programme as well as to fit in with University requirements. The new structure has a far greater
focus on creating safe beginners and has a more generalist approach to training. Staff see the
changes as a major improvement.
There is a sense among the students who met the inspection panel that they are able to see
the requisite number of patients. They did feel that it can be difficult to gain exposure to lots of
endodontic and crown and bridge work. One member of staff is responsible for ensuring that
each student gets the right patient cases in order to meet the totals they need. Assessment
clinics are utilised in order to direct particular patients to those students in need of particular
treatment types. The inspectors were told that there were sometimes difficulties maintaining
patients numbers at the level needed; there tend to be peaks and troughs. The School is
attempting to use community based teaching to aid the smoothing out of supply.
The termly meetings of the Progress Committee look at the clinical data collected of students
achievements. Poor clinical data can be used as a barrier to students’ eligibility to sit finals.
However, the inspectors felt that the records of clinical data they were able to review were not
entirely reliable. Some of the data the panel was originally given included treatments which

later had to be removed as they had not been completed. Although students’ logbooks looked
healthy and comprehensive, the panel feel the School needs to be able to look quickly and
reliably at a ‘snapshot’ of each student’s achievements at any given point during the
programme. Currently, this does not seem possible and the inspectors are keen that work on
an electronic system for recording clinical data is put in place as a matter of urgency. The
inspectors were told that methods of data collection can differ slightly depending upon the
discipline in question. A new, electronic system will assist in streamlining data collection
processes. The introduction of nominated tasks for each discipline which must be completed
prior to sign-up for finals adds an additional layer of assurance to monitoring of clinical
experience.
Some students commented that they felt that their clinical time seems to lessen as they
progress through the programme and that this meant they were at risk of falling behind and
went so far as to say they wanted their experience to be the subject of greater scrutiny on the
part of the School. This only strengthens the need for a reinforced and reliable method of
recording clinical activity.
Requirement 20: The provider should seek to improve student performance by
encouraging reflection and by providing feedback (Requirement Met)
Students said that they receive regular and detailed feedback on their performance and
professionalism. They highlighted feedback received while in outreach placements as being
particularly good and attributed this to the fact that, in outreach, they will often work in smaller
groups. This allows more time and focus on feedback. Some students, however, did tell the
inspectors that feedback could sometimes be variable and could depend to an extent upon the
location they are working in. Some supervisor’s feedback was viewed as being more useful or
more constructive than others’. Indeed, some students stated that they had to actively seek
feedback on some of the more busy clinics. The School needs to ensure that staff are striving
to give feedback as a matter of course rather than when requested.
On occasions, feedback is given to the year group as a whole. This is usually when staff have
identified an aspect of the programme or a specific aspect of an assessment with which a high
proportion of the cohort has struggled.
Feedback and reflection will be recorded as part of the new e-Portfolio system and students
will need to complete two reflective exercises each term. When students’ performance is
discussed at Progress Committee, students will be given feedback regarding these discussions
where appropriate. If the discussion relates to particularly excellent performance, the Head of
School will write personally to the individual student.
Requirement 21: Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills, experience and
training to undertake the task of assessment, appropriate general or specialist
registration with a regulatory body (Requirement Met)
Calibration of examiners is seen as an important activity for the School and regular calibration
sessions and workshops are conducted to ensure staff set aside time to meet and develop
their examining skills as well as making sure they are following the marking schemes and
guidelines required by the School. The induction process, which involves shadowing other
members of the team, also aids with calibration.
The University provides training on assessment best practice and many staff have achieved
additional education qualifications provided by the University of Bristol.
Members of the staff team attend Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry Assessment Committee
meetings and these are used to discuss best practice for assessments used in Undergraduate

training programmes such as the BDS.
Many of the staff engaged in assessing students are highly experienced examiners for external
bodies such as the Royal Colleges so they contribute their skills and knowledge to the
programme.
Bristol Dental School recently hosted a workshop looking at assessment best practice which
was open to all UK Dental Schools to attend and included input from the Higher Education
Academy, the national body for improving learning in higher education.
Requirement 22: Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent to
which assessment processes are rigorous, set at the correct standard, ensure equity of
treatment for students and have been fairly conducted (Requirement Met)
The inspectors had the opportunity to meet with the External Examiners who told them that
they had been given plenty of time for preparation in the lead up to the final clinical
examinations. They were also provided with relevant information well in advance of the
examination. It was clear to the inspectors that the External Examiners have been able to
make changes to the assessment process through their reports and that, over the preceding
years, the examinations have become more consistent and fair. The inspectors were especially
pleased to learn that the External Examiners felt that the School was receptive to their
comments, even when these might have been construed as being quite critical. Indeed, they
felt there was a “huge willingness” from the School to react to constructive criticism.
The External Examiners complete a report form which enables them to comment on the
processes for assessment including fairness and rigour. They can also comment on the
standards of students undertaking the BDS programme within the context of undergraduate
training in the UK. The External Examiners noted some inconsistencies between examining
pairs.
Requirement 23: Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear criteria.
Standard setting must be employed for summative assessments (Requirement Partly
Met)
This Requirement is only partly met since standard setting has not been applied to the entire
programme as yet. The School recognises that this area of the assessment structure is a
work-in-progress and the intention is to introduce standard setting procedures for all
summative assessments. A standard setting strategy is being implemented for the entire
Faculty.
So far, the feeling of the Senior Management team is that the introduction of standard setting
has been successful. The panel were informed that the Medical School has fully
implemented standard setting across all medical programmes so the Dental School is able to
tap into this knowledge and experience. The inspectors were told that a lot of research and
discussions with other Dental Schools is currently taking place.
Students are provided with information about standard setting. The School feels that
although the students tend to have a limited understanding of what is involved in standard
setting and the impact it has on them that, at the very least, they are being open and
transparent with them. The School needs to take steps to ensure students have a clearer
understanding of why standard setting is employed. However, the inspectors were pleased to
hear from students that guidelines and criteria for assessments are becoming clearer with
more consistent grading becoming evident to them. This is particularly important since one of
the core values of the School’s assessment strategy is to provide students with clear criteria
relating to how they will be assessed and examined.

When the inspection team asked students their views on how fairly they felt they were
assessed, they were pleased to learn that students acknowledged the work done by the
School to improve consistency of grading and that this was noticeable across the board.
The School aim to have introduced standard setting across all relevant assessments within
the next two years and the GDC will expect to receive updates on this work via the annual
monitoring exercise.
Requirement 24: Where appropriate, patient/peer/customer feedback should
contribute to the assessment process (Requirement Partly Met)
Patients are not formally asked to provide feedback on the treatment they have received as
part of the BDS programme. This means feedback from patients is only collected if they
choose to make comments. There are discussions taking place between the School and the
Trust regarding how best to use patient feedback and how to do this effectively so that useful
feedback is collected for each student. The panel were told that the Medical School had
encountered some practical issues when implementing patient feedback procedures so any
plans will be implemented cautiously. Students met by the panel agreed that there was little
formal structure to the collection of patient feedback.
Feedback from actors used in OSCE stations is used for personal and professional
development and peer reviews are integrated into the programme. For example, during role
play sessions, students provide peers with feedback on what went well and where
improvements might be made in terms of communication.
Requirement 25: Where possible, multiple samples of performance must be taken to
ensure the validity and reliability of the assessment conclusion (Requirement Met)
As previously noted, the BDS programme employs a range of assessment methods to test
candidates across a range of subjects. The School aims to ensure reliability and validity of
assessment decisions by assessing students in multiple locations using a variety of assessors
on a day to day basis. A clear mapping of the programme against the GDC learning outcomes
was provided in advance of the inspection and this showed the panel exactly how and when
each outcome is assessed during the programme as well as how Learning Outcomes are
tested again as students’ progress through the years of the course.
Requirement 26: The standard expected of students in each area to be assessed must
be clear and students and staff involved in assessment must be aware of this standard
(Requirement Met)
The Curriculum Handbook provided to students sets out the aims of the BDS programme and
outlines the learning outcomes to be achieved. The Assessment Handbook guides students as
to what they will be assessed on and when as well as describing the requirements for
progression through the programme. It gives detail for each unit of study and specific
information about the academic requirements expected of each student. Both handbooks are
circulated and made available through the virtual learning environment. Normally students are
given a lecture at the start of each unit covering the requirements and assessment methods.
More consistent approaches to grading and the provision of better guidance relating to
assessments allow students to understand more fully the reasons they have achieved, or not
achieved, a particular grade. This is bolstered by the clearer feedback given as a result of
assessment outcomes.

Actions
Req.
Number

Actions for the provider

Due date
(if applicable)

16

The GDC should be kept up-to-date on plans for team working
opportunities

Annual
monitoring
2015

17

The e-portfolio must be implemented as soon as is practicable

Annual
monitoring
2015

17

The School must ensure that decisions made by Progress
Committee are clearly recorded and auditable

Annual
monitoring
2015

19

The School must ensure that the processes for collecting and
reviewing clinical data are consistent and reliable

Annual
monitoring
2015

23

The School must continue to work on introducing Standard
Setting across the full range of assessments employed for the
BDS programme and must keep the GDC updated on this
progress

Annual
monitoring
2015

24

The School must continue to consider the development
methods of incorporating patient and peer feedback in
assessments

Annual
monitoring
2015

Standard 4 – Equality and diversity
The provider must comply with equal opportunities and discrimination legislation and
practice. They must also advocate this practice to students
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
27. Providers must adhere to current legislation and best
practice guidance relating to equality and diversity

28. Staff will receive training on equality and diversity,
development and appraisal mechanisms will include this

29. Providers will convey to students the importance of
compliance with equality and diversity law and principles of
the four UK nations both during training and after they begin
practice

GDC comments
Requirement 27: Providers must adhere to current legislation and best practice
guidance relating to equality and diversity (Requirement Met)
The School complies with the Equality Act 2010 and has achieved a silver Athena Swan
award which recognises commitment to the development of science-based careers for
women. The School aims to build on this success by achieving a gold award. To achieve
gold, institutions must demonstrate a continuing commitment to innovation in this area. A
working group with representation from undergraduate, postgraduate and DCP students
has been initiated in order to complete this work.
In relation to disabilities, students declaring a disability prior to commencement of the
programme are assessed by the University Occupational Health team in terms of fitness to
practise and support needs. First year students are also given a lecture at the start of the
course on what to do if they feel they need to declare a disability.
Students are given lectures on the importance and relevance of various factors relating to
equality and diversity such as harassment and bullying, child protection, information
governance and disability awareness.
Students are also taught about the GDC Standards guidance at various stages in the
programme. The new e-Portfolio will also align with the GDC standards guidance in terms of
recording students’ reflections on these issues.
Requirement 28: Staff will receive training on equality and diversity, development and
appraisal mechanisms will include this (Requirement Met)
The University HR team provides a suite of training involving lectures on mentoring,
induction and career development. Training is provided regarding equality and diversity
issues to all staff including those based in outreach. All new staff are required to undertake
training when taking up their post. Completion of this training is kept on record. The
University also provides online resources which, at the time of the inspection, were being
overhauled and redeveloped. A new, electronic appraisal system which records training will
help with monitoring who needs to attend refresher courses which are made available

annually. Staff inductions also include information relevant to equality and diversity issues.
Requirement 29: Providers will convey to students the importance of compliance with
equality and diversity law and principles of the four UK nations both during training and
after they begin practice (Requirement Met)
Students receive lectures on personal and professional development which cover
communicating with patients with different needs. There are workshops covering patient
experience aimed at getting students to consider the impact of living with a chronic illness or
being an elderly person. There is didactic coverage during the programme of the 2010 Equality
Act. Arrangements are also being made for students to visit a stroke patient unit adjacent to
the South Bristol site as part of learning around the management of older patients. Child
Protection officers also visit the School to talk to students about how to spot potential abuse.
Law and Ethics is covered throughout all five years of the programme.

Actions
Req.
Number
-

Actions for the provider

-

Due date
(if applicable)
-

Summary of Actions
Req. Actions for the provider

Observations

Due date
(if applicable)

Response from the Provider
1

The School should investigate the feasibility of
introducing students onto clinics at an earlier stage in
the programme

The School acknowledges that earlier introduction
of students to the clinic would be beneficial. In the
academic year 2014-15 the Pre-clinical Dean has
set up a pilot with the lead for Community Based
Teaching whereby Year 1 students will undertake
two observational visits to South Bristol
Community Hospital. In the first visit students will
observe members of staff (dentists, dental
therapists, dental hygienists, and dental nurses)
and in the second visit will shadow senior
undergraduate students. A student handbook
outlines specific intended learning outcomes for
these visits and observation reports. Early
indications are that the first visits undertaken prior
to Christmas 2014, in the first term students attend
the programme, have been highly regarded by
students and staff alike. If review of the complete
pilot confirms its success, this concept will be
extended.
A longer term aspiration for the School is to
undertake a curriculum review (the last full review
being in 2005-06, with a restructure in 2012-13).
From 2015-16 the dental school will reside within a

Already underway

2016-18

restructured Faculty which also delivers
undergraduate medical and veterinary sciences
programmes. The veterinary sciences programme
has recently been reviewed and the new
programme, now in its second year of
implementation, has successfully integrated casebased teaching into Year 1. The medical
curriculum is currently under a major review with
planned implementation of a revised curriculum
from 2017. Initial indications are that increased
case-based teaching and learning will be provided
within the revised medical curriculum. A
curriculum review for the BDS programme will
likely follow such a model and therefore provide
increased clinical dental context to Year 1. This
may, in turn, facilitate an earlier introduction to
clinical activity. It is intended that the BDS
curriculum review will overlap and follow on
immediately from the medical curriculum review
and therefore the aim would be to deliver a
reviewed and revised BDS programme from 2018.
The review process will start in 2016.
2

The School should look at making the colour scheme for
student tunics clearer

We are working with UHBristol NHS Foundation
Trust (UHBristol) to review options for improving
the clarity of student year groupings on the clinic.
Whilst this review takes place, we have opted to
display posters in the clinical areas which highlight
the colour scheme currently in place.

To be
implemented in
academic year
2015/16

4

The School should work to improve the consistency of

The introduction of the e-Portfolio this academic

Ongoing

experience for students across all locations with
particular reference to supervision and feedback

year has improved the standardisation of feedback
from supervising staff on clinic. The aim is to
monitor, evaluate and improve on the feedback
that is captured through the ePortfolio system
utilising the Annual Programme Review
mechanism.
We have doubled the frequency of staff-student
liaison committee meetings, and increased
numbers and diversity of staff attending, in order to
obtain direct and regular feedback from students.
This has facilitated identification of specific
shortfalls and bottlenecks in allocations of patients
to students, and issues around supervision and
feedback.
We are working closely with UHBristol to review
and redesign patient pathways for student clinics
to improve the throughput of patients and
consistency of student experience across all
clinical locations. This includes improvements to
patient booking process, and piloting text
reminders for student patients.

7

The School should give thought to ways of improving
students understanding of the Clinical Incident Policy

Students are currently appraised of the Clinical
Incident Policy through Trust Induction in Year 2
(which is repeated in Year 5). In this academic
year we have introduced refresher training for
students in the Clinical Introduction to Operative
Dentistry Course (Year 3) and Clinical
Management and Team Working Course (Year 2).

Completed

Additionally, the School has increased the
accessibility of the policy through making this
available on the student intranet, and signposting
the policy in relevant handbooks such as that for
Rules, Policies & Procedures.
8

Part-time staff should be made more aware of the
School’s Fitness to Practise (FtP) procedures and their
importance

The Faculty Education Director, who is also a
Fitness to Practise case investigator, will attend
future General Dental Practitioner training sessions
to improve awareness on the School and Faculty’s
FtP policy and procedures, including the
appropriate use of student concern forms.

Ongoing
throughout
2015/16

11

The School should continue to investigate methods of
implementing changes at the earliest opportunity

The School has recently increased the frequency
of Staff-Student Liaison Committees (SSLCs)
which has improved the dialogue with student year
representatives. This has allowed staff to adopt a
more proactive approach to change and the
communication of change. Members of the School
Executive, including the Head of School, Head of
Teaching, and School Manager, attend SSLCs and
can report back to the School Executive which
meets every fortnight and can take immediate
action on specific outstanding matters raised by
students.

Ongoing

12

The GDC should be kept up-to-date with the staffing
situation and any changes or developments in this area

At the time of the inspection, there were several
vacant posts which have now been filled. These
include 1.0 whole time equivalent (wte) Clinical
Lecturer in Restorative Dentistry, and 0.2wte
General Dental Practitioner in Restorative

Ongoing
To be reported in
Annual Monitoring
Return 2015

Dentistry.
Additionally, following negotiation with UHBristol,
the School is advertising for joint post for a
Consultant in Oral Medicine. This has allowed the
School to put plans in place to jointly fund a
Consultant in Dental Public Health post with Public
Health England.
16

The GDC should be kept up-to-date on plans for team
working opportunities

We have begun the implementation of
collaborative practice at South Bristol Community
Hospital as set out in the document provided to the
inspection panel. As the dental students and DCPs
integrate further we will look to expand the
collaborative practices to clinics within Bristol
Dental Hospital.

Ongoing
To be reported in
Annual Monitoring
Return 2015

17

The e-portfolio must be implemented as soon as is
practicable

Since the inspection visit, the ePortfolio has been
fully implemented in all clinical areas within the
Hospital and at outreach sites.

Completed

17

The School must ensure that decisions made by
Progress Committee are clearly recorded and auditable

A major piece of work undertaken since the
inspection visit and implemented this academic
year has been to further formalise examination
board and progress committee decision-making
and recording of decisions. Specifically, the format
of Progress Committee agendas and minutes has
been amended so that decisions are clearly
recorded, and any matters arising are reviewed at
the subsequent meeting.

Ongoing

All clinical data is now collected through the

Ongoing

19

The School must ensure that the processes for

To be reported in
Annual Monitoring
Return 2015

23

24

collecting and reviewing clinical data are consistent and
reliable

ePortfolio system, and the reporting function is
being used to provide reports to Progress
Committees. The functionality of the reporting
within the system is being explored so that
students will be able to view their clinical data.

The School must continue to work on introducing
Standard Setting across the full range of assessments
employed for the BDS programme and must keep the
GDC updated on this progress

Standard setting is continuing to be introduced and
implemented across the programme. Health
Sciences Oral Biology units are utilising standard
setting for the first time in 2015/16. Other Health
Science units and Personal and Professional
Development units are the remaining areas in
which standard setting will be implemented. This
has been set as a key objective for the Theme and
Unit leads in these areas, and this is overseen by
the Dental Assessments Committee. The
programme aims to have full standard setting
utilisation in academic year 2015/16.

Ongoing and to be
completed by
2015/16.

The ePortfolio introduced this academic year offers
opportunities for patient feedback. We are
currently exploring how the ePortfolio can be
utilised to collect patient feedback following clinical
treatment. This would be monitored alongside
other formative assessment grades for clinical
activity.

Ongoing

The School must continue to consider the development
methods of incorporating patient and peer feedback in
assessments

The Dental Assessment Committee provides
oversight and strategic direction of assessment.
This committee will review the extent of peer
feedback currently undertaken and further

To be reported in
Annual Monitoring
Return 2015

To be reported in
Annual Monitoring
Return 2015

To be reported in
Annual Monitoring
Return 2015

opportunities for this to be implemented within the
programme.

Observations from the provider on content of report
We would like to take this opportunity to thank the GDC Inspection Panel for their support in reviewing our programme. As a School, we are
delighted that the BDS programme has been deemed as ‘sufficient’ by the inspection team, and we look forward to continuing to develop the
programme with the support of the suggested actions from the inspection team.

Recommendation to the GDC
The inspectors recommend that this qualification is sufficient for holders to apply for registration as a dentist with the General Dental Council

