Education Quality Assurance Inspection Report
Education
Provider/Awarding
Body
Cardiff University

Outcome of Inspection

Programme/Award

Inspection Dates

Bachelor of Dental
Surgery (BDS)

29 – 30 January 2019

Recommended that the BDS
continues to be sufficient for the
graduating cohort to register as
dentist.

*Full details of the inspection process can be found in the annex*
Inspection summary
Remit and purpose of inspection:

Inspection referencing the Standards for
Education to determine approval of the
award for the purpose of registration with
the GDC as a dentist

Risk based: focused on Requirement 4, 9,
11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 19
Learning Outcomes:

Preparing for Practice (Dentist)

Programme inspection dates:

29-30 January 2019

Inspection team:

Jane Louise Jones (Chair and Non-registrant
Member)
David Young (Dentist Member)
Kevin Seymour (Dentist Member)
Liam O’Brien (Dentist Member)
Rachael Mendel (GDC Quality Assurance
Officer

The inspection undertaken at the University of Cardiff was risk-based focusing on specific
areas of their BDS programme. The GDC quality assurance team and a panel of
experienced education associates undertook an independent evaluation of information
available to determine the content of each inspection. The information considered included
annual monitoring returns, previous inspection reports (including progress against actions),
responses to wider recommendations in the GDC Annual Review of Education, Fitness to
Practise data and complaints received.
Following this assessment, it was decided that the inspection panel focus on Requirements
4, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, and 19.
The programme benefits from having dedicated staff who work hard to support each student
and provide a learning experience that ensures they are able complete the BDS
successfully. The panel also noted the excellent facilities available to the students and the
support that the programme provides to the students.
The education associates had no major concerns with the programme and agreed it was
well organised and ensures thorough assessment of students across the learning outcomes
contained within the GDC publication ‘Preparing for Practice’.
The development of students as they moved through the programme stages was clearly
evidenced and the panel was satisfied that upon graduation the students were fit to practise
as safe beginners.

Background and overview of qualification
Annual intake
Programme duration

Format of programme

Number of providers delivering the
programme

72 students (based on 2018/19 figures)
Year 1 - at least 30 weeks' duration
Year 2 - at least 45 weeks duration
Year 3 - at least 45 weeks’ duration
Year 4 - at least 45 weeks duration
Year 5 - at least 40 weeks’ duration
Year 1 – knowledge developed with the
School of Biosciences.
Year 2 - knowledge, simulated clinical
activities and patient treatment.
Year 3 – knowledge, simulated clinical
activities and patient treatment
Year 4 - clinical skills, patient treatment,
outreach
Year 5 - clinical skills, outreach, patient
treatment
15 in the UK (1 in Wales)

The GDC wishes to thank the staff, students, and external stakeholders involved with the
BDS programme for their co-operation and assistance with the inspection.

Outcome of relevant Requirements1
Standard One
1

Met

2

Met

3

Met

4

Met

5

Met

6

Met

7

Met

8

Met
Standard Two

9

Met

10

Met

11

Met

12

Met
Standard Three

13

Met

14

Part Met

15

Met

16

Met

17

Met

18

Met

19

Met

20

Met

21

Met

All Requirements within the Standards for Education are applicable for all programmes unless otherwise
stated. Specific requirements will be examined through inspection activity and will be identified via risk
analysis processes or due to current thematic reviews.
1

Standard 1 – Protecting patients
Providers must be aware of their duty to protect the public. Providers must ensure that
patient safety is paramount and care of patients is of an appropriate standard. Any risk
to the safety of patients and their care by students must be minimised.
Requirement 1: Students must provide patient care only when they have demonstrated
adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical procedures, the student should be
assessed as competent in the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 2: Providers must have systems in place to inform patients that they may
be treated by students and the possible implications of this. Patient agreement to
treatment by a student must be obtained and recorded prior to treatment commencing.
(Requirement Met)
Requirement 3: Students must only provide patient care in an environment which is
safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with relevant legislation and
requirements regarding patient care, including equality and diversity, wherever
treatment takes place. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 4: When providing patient care and services, providers must ensure that
students are supervised appropriately according to the activity and the student’s stage
of development. (Requirement Met)
The inspection panel was tasked with looking specifically at staffing levels and whether this
had any impact on how this Requirement is met.
Staff to student ratios were deemed sufficient by the panel. The panel noted that a senior
dental nurse organised the clinical supervision of students on a sessional basis, based on
students’ needs in terms of procedure and stage within the programme. This ensured that
supervision levels were being considered during every session and changes were being made
where necessary.
There is a timetable in place to ensure all clinics are covered and there is always suitable
student support available. The students also commented that they felt appropriately supported
and supervised on clinic and at outreach placements. The panel was informed that clinics
would be cancelled should the ratios not be achievable on any particular day.
The panel saw evidence of succession planning taking place, with deputies in a number of
positions to ensure staff are being supported and trained to progress as some staff retire.
The panel had no concerns about student supervision and that staffing levels were being
managed appropriately.
Requirement 5: Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained. This should
include training in equality and diversity legislation relevant for the role. Clinical
supervisors must have appropriate general or specialist registration with a UK
regulatory body. (Requirement Met)
The inspection panel was tasked with looking specifically at the process of managing outreach
placement and staff training at outreach.
Each outreach placement is governed by a Service Level Agreement (SLA) and Health and
Safety Declaration Statement that is issued annually to local clinical leads in outreach

locations. This documentation is reviewed annually by the School’s Quality and Enhancement
Manager and senior clinical academic team to ensure alignment and compliance with GDC
requirements and Health and Safety guidelines issued by the University.
Staff are kept updated through regular training at Education Days and email correspondence.
Outreach staff also attend a supervisors meeting on an annual basis at the Dental Hospital.
All School and NHS staff are subject to an annual Performance Development Review (PDR).
This includes a review of mandatory training such as Equality and Diversity and Health and
Safety training.
All new outreach staff receive an Induction Guide to clinical supervision and training, which
includes shadowing more experienced members of staff on clinic. This training is organised
and provided by the clinical lead.
Staff are also provided with information on feedback and assessing/grading students to ensure
that staff apply the same marking principles (development indicators) in outreach as in the
University Dental Hospital.
The panel saw evidence of the signed SLA’s and evidence that outreach centres were
assessing using the same standards and grading criteria as the university hospital. The panel
saw evidence of strong relationships between outreach staff and the university. In order to
strengthen this relationship, the university too should strive to make more regular visits to each
outreach centre. Going forward, as well as providing training to outreach staff on assessment,
they should also consider providing training on pastoral support for outreach staff to ensure
that any issues that could arise while on outreach are dealt with appropriately.
Requirement 6: Providers must ensure that students and all those involved in the
delivery of education and training are aware of their obligation to raise concerns if they
identify any risks to patient safety and the need for candour when things go wrong.
Providers should publish policies so that it is clear to all parties how concerns should
be raised and how these concerns will be acted upon. Providers must support those
who do raise concerns and provide assurance that staff and students will not be
penalised for doing so. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 7: Systems must be in place to identify and record issues that may affect
patient safety. Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be taken by
the provider and where necessary the relevant regulatory body should be notified.
(Requirement Met)
Requirement 8: Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and apply as
required. The content and significance of the student fitness to practise procedures
must be conveyed to students and aligned to GDC Student Fitness to Practise
Guidance. Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar with the
GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance. Providers must also ensure that the GDC’s
Standard for the Dental Team are embedded within student training. (Requirement Met)

Standard 2 – Quality evaluation and review of the programme
The provider must have in place effective policy and procedures for the monitoring and
review of the programme.
Requirement 9: The provider must have a framework in place that details how it
manages the quality of the programme which includes making appropriate changes to
ensure the curriculum continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and adapts

to changing legislation and external guidance. There must be a clear statement about
where responsibility lies for this function. (Requirement Met)
The panel was tasked with looking specifically at staffing levels and whether this has had any
impact on this requirement.
The school uses the Annual Review and Enhancement (ARE) process along with the strategic
period review process, to manage the quality of the BDS programme. The panel saw evidence
of this framework and were satisfied with the quality framework functions and where
responsibility for these functions lie.
The panel also saw evidence of how staffing levels were managed and the process that was
followed to ensure that any concerns relating to staffing followed the appropriate process to
address these concerns, for both succession planning and recruitment of additional staff.
Requirement 10: Any concerns identified through the Quality Management framework,
including internal and external reports relating to quality, must be addressed as soon
as possible and the GDC notified of serious threats to students achieving the learning
outcomes. The provider will have systems in place to quality assure placements.
(Requirement Met)
Requirement 11: Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external quality
assurance procedures. External quality assurance should include the use of external
examiners, who should be familiar with the GDC learning outcomes and their context
and QAA guidelines should be followed where applicable. Patient and/or customer
feedback must be collected and used to inform programme development. (Requirement
Met)
The panel was tasked with looking specifically at how student feedback was used to inform the
development of the programme and how this impacted on the requirement.
The programme uses a variety of methods to collect and use student feedback in programme
development, including the structured modular evaluation, student surveys, staff student
panels and monthly student representative meetings. The students informed the panel of ways
in which they had fed back to the staff about issues they were having, and how these had
been addressed.
The panel saw evidence of how the programme effectively used feedback from students in
programme development, and how they then fed back any changes made to the students.
This was done, for example, through the use of posters, in the form of ‘You Said We Did.’
Requirement 12: The provider must have effective systems in place to quality assure
placements where students deliver treatment to ensure that patient care and student
assessment across all locations meets these Standards. The quality assurance systems
should include the regular collection of student and patient feedback relating to
placements. (Requirement Met)
The panel was tasked with looking specifically at how the quality assurance of placements and
outreach takes place and how patient and student feedback is collected and utilised.
The online Module Evaluation (ME) system was implemented in 2017 across all programmes
to ensure a consistent approach to analysis and student feedback. This system provides a
quantitative data report, which can be communicated to all students on a variety of platforms.
Students can also review the data directly in the Online Module Evaluation Survey tool for their
own cohort and previous cohorts.

Additionally, monthly student representative meetings are used alongside student
questionnaires to ensure that issues are resolved as soon as they are recognised rather than
at year-end. The panel saw evidence of changes to outreach placements and timetables had
occurred due to student feedback.
The panel saw evidence of how the quality assurance of outreach placements was monitored
and recorded in an action log, based on issues raised and the resulting changes or action to
address the issue.
The panel were satisfied that outreach placements were being quality assured appropriately,
and that students had the opportunity to feedback to the university about their placements.

Standard 3– Student assessment
Assessment must be reliable and valid. The choice of assessment method must be
appropriate to demonstrate achievement of the GDC learning outcomes. Assessors
must be fit to perform the assessment task.
Requirement 13: To award the qualification, providers must be assured that students
have demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes, and that they
are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner. Evidence must be provided that
demonstrates this assurance, which should be supported by a coherent approach to the
principles of assessment referred to in these standards. (Requirement Met)
The panel was tasked with looking specifically at the process of sign-up for final examinations
and access to a range and number of patients and whether this has any impact on how this
Requirement is met.
The sign-up process is the cumulative end point of longitudinal student progress monitoring in
both clinical and academic environments. This process was previously called Academic
Review and Feedback (ARFC) but has evolved following the introduction of LiftUpp and is now
referred to as SPFTP (Student Performance and Fitness to Progress).
Through the use of LiftUpp, work based clinical performance data is now being used in the
process. The school now has full LiftUpp data or other data based around LiftUpp development
indicators (such as Paediatric outreach data collected in a log book). The programme is now
able to monitor numbers and experiences but also cross link this with student development
which is fundamental to the SPFTP process and LiftUpp data.
In the students final year frequent “sign-up” meetings are held where the collected data is
reviewed to ensure that the student was considered able to complete the course and be
eligible for registration with the GDC as a “safe beginner”.
The panel saw evidence of how, through regular monitoring, struggling students were picked
up and sent to drop- in sessions for additional support. The panel also saw evidence of the
sign-up process, and meeting minutes to discuss student progression and were assured that
they were being monitored appropriately.
Requirement 14: The provider must have in place management systems to plan, monitor
and centrally record the assessment of students, including the monitoring of clinical
and/or technical experience, throughout the programme against each of the learning
outcomes. (Requirement Partly Met)

At the previous inspection, it was evident that the programme was using multiple methods for
recording and monitoring data, depending on the clinical area or outreach centre that the
student was in. This resulted in a number of different sources of information needing to be
collated in a meaningful way. In order to ensure a more consistent approach to recording and
monitoring student clinical experience and progress, the school have implemented LiftUpp.
The panel noted how the use of LiftUpp had enabled the programme to pick up any struggling
students and provide support to these students in a timely manner.
LiftUpp has still not been introduced across all outreach sites and in some cases, double
recording of data is taking place, as a method of ensuring accuracy of LiftUpp. While the panel
understands that the process is still ongoing, the programme should strive to introduce LiftUpp
across all sites so the double running of two systems will stop. The introduction of LiftUpp
across all sites will also standardise the monitoring and assessment process and ensure
consistency is being achieved across all sites.
Requirement 15: Students must have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and should undertake each activity relating to patient care on
sufficient occasions to enable them to develop the skills and the level of competency to
achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes. (Requirement Met)
The panel was tasked with looking specifically at access to the range and number of patients
and whether this has any impact on how this Requirement is met.
Through the longitudinal progress monitoring and feedback system including the sign-up
process described in requirement 13, the programme ensures that students have exposure to
an appropriate range and breadth of experience. Students are appraised termly of their
progress throughout the programme ensuring that where they fall behind, they are aware of
this and can remediate the situation. This is done in a number of ways; through SPFTP and
input into LiftUpp. At the end of the year if a student’s ability to progress is recorded as
unsatisfactory then they will not progress and will be required to repeat the year. In Final Year
this means they will not be signed-up to sit their Final BDS examinations and will not graduate.
The panel noted that students were exposed to a variety of patients and procedures, both at
the university hospital and during outreach, providing them with an appropriate range and
breadth of experience.
Requirement 16: Providers must demonstrate that assessments are fit for purpose and
deliver results which are valid and reliable. The methods of assessment used must be
appropriate to the learning outcomes, in line with current and best practice and be
routinely monitored, quality assured and developed. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 17: Assessment must utilise feedback collected from a variety of sources,
which should include other members of the dental team, peers, patients and/or
customers. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 18: The provider must support students to improve their performance by
providing regular feedback and by encouraging students to reflect on their practice.
(Requirement Met)
Requirement 19: Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills, experience and
training to undertake the task of assessment, including appropriate general or specialist
registration with a UK regulatory body. Examiners/ assessors should have received
training in equality and diversity relevant for their role. (Requirement Met)

Under this Requirement, the panel was tasked with looking specifically at staffing levels and
whether this has any impact on how this Requirement is met.
The panel saw evidence that staff involved in assessment had appropriate registration and
qualifications. Most have some form of educational training. Supervisors are trained on giving
feedback to students at multiple levels.
The panel saw evidence of how training sessions had been organised throughout the roll out of
LiftUpp to ensure that all those involved in clinical assessment know how to use the system
and are marking at the same level. Assessment training videos are made available to staff, in
order to support them with assessment. Calibration of the data on LiftUpp is monitored and
feedback is given during training sessions, to try and ensure consistency. New staff members
are also required to shadow more experienced colleagues during their induction period.
The panel were satisfied that the staffing levels were appropriate and that they did not
negatively impact the ability of the programme to assess the students.
Requirement 20: Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent to which
assessment processes are rigorous, set at the correct standard, ensure equity of
treatment for students and have been fairly conducted. The responsibilities of the
external examiners must be clearly documented. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 21: Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear criteria. The
standard expected of students in each area to be assessed must be clear and students
and staff involved in assessment must be aware of this standard. An appropriate
standard setting process must be employed for summative assessments. (Requirement
Met)

Summary of Action
Req.
number
14

Action

5

Pastoral support training
for outreach staff

5

In order to strengthen
relationships between
outreach staff and the
University, the University
too should strive to make
more regular visits to
each outreach centre.

The programme should
strive to introduce LiftUpp
across all sites so the
double running of two
systems will stop.

Observations & response
from Provider
The School will continue to
strengthen relationships
between outreach staff and the
University. The School will
review the timetable for visits
and explore opportunities to
increase the frequency of visits
to centres.
Consideration to be given to
providing training on pastoral
support for outreach staff, to
ensure that any issues that
could arise while on outreach
are dealt with appropriately.
The School recognises that
there are challenges associated
with this which may take longer
to resolve than we would like.
However, we will endeavour to
explore the reasons for these,
identify potential solutions and
map out a timeframe for
progress.

Due date
Annual
Monitoring

31 July 2020

31 July 2020

Observations from the provider on content of report
The School was very pleased to receive a positive report from the General Dental Council,
confirming their recommendation that the BDS continues to be sufficient for the graduating
cohort to register as dentist.

Recommendations to the GDC
Education associates’
recommendation
Date of next regular monitoring
exercise

Qualification continues to be sufficient for
holders to apply for registration as a dentist
with the General Dental Council
2020

Annex 1
Inspection purpose and process

1. As part of its duty to protect patients and promote high standards within the professions it
regulates, the General Dental Council (GDC) quality assures the education and training of
student dentists and dental care professionals (DCPs) at institutions whose qualifications
enable the holder to apply for registration with the GDC. It also quality assures new
qualifications where it is intended that the qualification will lead to registration. The aim of
this quality assurance activity is to ensure that institutions produce a new registrant who has
demonstrated, on graduation, that they have met the learning outcomes required for
registration with the GDC. This ensures that students who obtain a qualification leading to
registration are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner.
2. Inspections are a key element of the GDC’s quality assurance activity. They enable a
recommendation to be made to the Council of the GDC regarding the ‘sufficiency’ of the
programme for registration as a dentist and ‘approval’ of the programme for registration as a
dental care professional. The GDC’s powers are derived under Part II, Section 9 of the
Dentists Act 1984 (as amended).
3. The GDC document ‘Standards for Education’ 2nd edition1 is the framework used to
evaluate qualifications. There are 21 Requirements in three distinct Standards, against
which each qualification is assessed.
4. The education provider is requested to undertake a self-evaluation of the programme
against the individual Requirements under the Standards for Education. This involves stating
whether each Requirement is ‘met’, ‘partly met’ or ‘not met’ and to provide evidence in
support of their evaluation. The inspection panel examines this evidence, may request
further documentary evidence and gathers further evidence from discussions with staff and
students. The panel will reach a decision on each Requirement, using the following
descriptors:
A Requirement is met if:
“There is sufficient appropriate evidence derived from the inspection process. This evidence
provides the inspectors with broad confidence that the provider demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students is supportive of
documentary evidence and the evidence is robust, consistent and not contradictory. There
may be minor deficiencies in the evidence supplied but these are likely to be
inconsequential.”
A Requirement is partly met if:
“Evidence derived from the inspection process is either incomplete or lacks detail and, as
such, fails to convince the inspection panel that the provider fully demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students may not fully
support the evidence submitted or there may be contradictory information in the evidence
provided. There is, however, some evidence of compliance and it is likely that either (a) the
appropriate evidence can be supplied in a short time frame, or, (b) any deficiencies identified
can be addressed and evidenced in the annual monitoring process.”
A Requirement is not met if:

“The provider cannot provide evidence to demonstrate a Requirement or the evidence
provided is not convincing. The information gathered at the inspection through meetings with
staff and students does not support the evidence provided or the evidence is inconsistent
and/or incompatible with other findings. The deficiencies identified are such as to give rise to
serious concern and will require an immediate action plan from the provider. The
consequences of not meeting a Requirement in terms of the overall sufficiency of a
programme will depend upon the compliance of the provider across the range of
Requirements and the possible implications for public protection”
5. Inspection reports highlight areas of strength and draw attention to areas requiring
improvement and development, including actions that are required to be undertaken by the
provider. Where an action is needed for a Requirement to be met, the term ‘must’ is used to
describe the obligation on the provider to undertake this action. For these actions the
inspectors may stipulate a specific timescale by which the action must be completed or when
an update on progress must be provided. In their observations on the content of the report,
the provider should confirm the anticipated date by which these actions will be completed.
Where an action would improve how a Requirement is met, the term ‘should’ is used and for
these actions there will be no due date stipulated. Providers will be asked to report on the
progress in addressing the required actions through the annual monitoring process. Serious
concerns about a lack of progress may result in further inspections or other quality
assurance activity.
6. The QA team aims to send an initial draft of the inspection report to the provider within two
months of the conclusion of the inspection. The provider of the qualification has the
opportunity to provide factual corrections on the draft report. Following the production of the
final report the provider is asked to submit observations on, or objections to, the report and
the actions listed. Where the inspection panel have recommended that the programme is
sufficient for registration, the Council of the GDC have delegated responsibility to the GDC
Registrar to consider the recommendations of the panel. Should an inspection panel not be
able to recommend ‘sufficiency’ or ‘approval’, the report and observations would be
presented to the Council of the GDC for consideration.
7. The final version of the report and the provider’s observations are published on the GDC
website.

