www.gdc-uk.org

GDC Inspection Process for
BDS Providers
2018/19 academic year only

September 2018

Contents
Page
1. Introduction

3

2. Sufficiency for graduating cohort – senior registrant student
sign-off

5

3. Inspection Panel

6

4. Inspections

7

5. Pre-inspection procedures and documents

9

6. The Programme Inspection

10

7. The Assessment/Examination Inspection – this will not be
relevant for all education providers in 2018/19

13

8. Assessment/Exam Meeting – this will not be relevant for all
education providers

14

9. Inspection Reports and Registrar’s Decision

15

10. Timescales

16

11. Factual Corrections and Observations

17

12. Achievement of Requirements and Actions

18

13. Inspectors’ Recommendation to the Registrar

19

14. Registrar’s Decision

20

15. Publication of Report and Observations

21

2

1. Introduction
As part of its role as the regulatory body for dentists and dental care professionals (DCPs),
the General Dental Council (GDC) has a statutory responsibility to promote high standards
of education in all aspects of dentistry and, consequently, sets out requirements for all UK
programmes that lead to registration as a dental professional. The GDC has responsibility
for the quality assurance of education and training leading to registration to make sure that
each programme meets the requirements that have been set. This is a statutory function
and the purpose of this process is to fulfil the GDC’s primary role to protect patients.
This document describes the processes that the GDC uses to quality assure education and
training programmes that lead to registration in the UK as a dentist. It contains general
information about the process as well as information that will be of particular use to
programme providers.
The GDC’s interest in programmes leading to registration as a dentist lies in determining
whether a programme has reached the required level and that those who are awarded a
qualification should be eligible to apply for registration. The GDC does not rank or grade
programmes or dental schools.
In order to award qualifications which can lead to registration with the GDC as a dentist, the
provider must first hold dental authority status. Dental authority status is a legal status
granted to education providers by the Privy Council. Holding dental authority status allows
students of the authority to practise dentistry under supervision whilst not registered without
committing the offence of the illegal practice of dentistry. Also, graduates of dental
authorities have qualifications which the GDC recognises as conferring a right to
registration in the dentists register (provided, of course, that the other requirements of
registration are met).
In terms of clinical practice, the GDC does not set target numbers for each of the clinical
activities a student would be expected to undertake during the course of their training. It is
expected that students carry out procedures as many times as necessary for the school to
be satisfied of their competence; schools must also be able to demonstrate/evidence this to
inspection panels.
The GDC’s powers under the Dentists Act 1984 uses the term ‘sufficiency’ to describe the
acceptable standard achieved by a programme of a dental authority that will allow
graduates to apply for registration as dentists. ‘Sufficiency’ is granted to individual Bachelor
of Dental Surgery (BDS/BChD) and Licence in Dental Surgery programmes where students
are deemed to have received the requisite knowledge and skill for the efficient practice of
dentistry. The term sufficient/sufficiency is set out in the Act, and the GDC are therefore not
legally able to state a qualification is ‘approved’ or ‘accredited’.
The GDC has published a set of Standards for Education. These standards are the
regulatory tool that the GDC uses to ensure that a programme is fit for purpose. The three
standards are central to the GDC’s Quality Assurance (QA) processes and contain a total of
21 requirements. The standards cover the following areas:

3

1. Patient protection
2. Quality evaluation and review
3. Student assessment
Equality and diversity requirements are integrated across the standards.
The GDC will assess the demonstration of these standards at all stages of the QA process.
The Standards for Education require that providers only allow students to be awarded a
qualification if they demonstrate a set of learning outcomes, which have been defined by
the GDC in the document:
Preparing for Practice (PfP): Dental Team Learning Outcomes for Registration (2015)
These learning outcomes were designed with a focus on patient protection and future oral
health need. Preparing for Practice contains learning outcomes for each of the seven
professions that are registered with the GDC:
•

Dentist;

•

Dental Therapist;

•

Dental Hygienist;

•

Dental Nurse;

•

Orthodontic Therapist;

•

Clinical Dental Technician and

•

Dental Technician.

4

2. Sufficiency for graduating cohort – senior registrant student sign-off
Before students can qualify for an award, the senior registrant member of staff involved in
the delivery/management of the programme (or awarding body, if it is different) is
responsible for signing off each student as ‘fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner’.
This means that the student should be awarded the qualification. The GDC understands
that each provider has a different approach, and each inspection panel will be briefed on
the approach taken prior to the inspection.
Having a senior registrant sign off a student is an important part of the process in terms of
fulfilling the GDC role of protecting patients. The responsible registrant must consider
carefully, taking into account the evidence from the education and training process, whether
each student is safe to practise. This registrant will also normally be the character reference
on the student’s application to register as a dentist with the GDC. If the student is signed off
as safe to practise at the level of the safe beginner, without having fulfilled the necessary
requirements, the registrant who signed off the student may be at risk of GDC fitness to
practise proceedings.

5

3. Inspection Panel
GDC Education Associates (EA) undertake inspections of programmes that lead to
registration with the GDC. EAs include GDC registrants and non-registrants. All EAs are
appointed through an open and competitive recruitment exercise, are trained in the GDC
QA process and receive on-going training throughout their appointment. EAs typically work
in panels of four for a BDS/BChD award (three dentists from a variety of backgrounds
including a General Practitioner). Inspection panels are always chaired by a non-registrant
EA. Bespoke panels are drawn together by the QA team for the specific needs of the
education provider being inspected, based on their experience and expertise. Inspection
panels work alongside members of the GDC’s QA team. EAs also undertake annual
monitoring scrutiny, evaluations of new programme proposals and other work relevant to
quality assurance, education and training developments.
Inspection panels will make a recommendation as to whether a dentistry programme is
‘sufficient’ for registration. These recommendations are made to the GDC Registrar, who
has delegated powers from Council to make decisions on these matters.
Following the completion of the report, providers are sent a feedback form asking to provide
comment on the inspection process and the panel. If the education provider would like to
give feedback on a member of the panel or member of the QA team, they should contact
the Head of Education Quality Assurance or the QA Operations Manager as soon as
possible at qualityassurance@gdc-uk.org.

6

4. Inspections
Prior to 2018, dental authorities offering established programmes which lead to registration
as a dentist, were inspected on a periodic basis, normally once every five to six years. In
2017, we published our discussion document Shifting the balance: a better, fairer system of
dental regulation. This consists of four main areas of proposals. The first is for dental
regulation to move ‘upstream’, which will place a stronger emphasis on engaging with all
registrants to improve patient protection, learning within the system, engaging more
effectively with current and future dental professionals, and developing alternative
approaches to continuing professional development.
Beginning in the 2018/9 academic year we will start to use a risk-based QA process. Going
forward this will determine the frequency and type of inspection each provider will undergo.
We will inspect all BDS programmes in the 2018/9 academic year. The reasons why we
chose to QA the BDS education providers under this process first are:
•

The scope of practice for dentists and the numbers of students undertaking
BDS/BChD programmes offer a greater potential risk in comparison to the other
dental care professionals who register with the GDC.

•

Most BDS/BChD programmes have not been inspected since the 2012-4 inspection
round.

Further to the February-May 2018 consultation, no major concerns were raised about this
approach.
The remit, scope and duration of each BDS/BChD inspection in the 2018/9 academic year
are based on:
•

Annual monitoring returns, including the providers’ self-assessment against the
Standards for Education

•

Previous inspection reports and the progress made against actions

•

Responses to actions from the GDC’s annual review of education

•

Complaints received (if any) about the programme/provider

•

Analysis of fitness to practise cases against recent graduates1 of a programme

•

Responses from the Foundation/Vocational Trainee survey

•

Issues identified at other programmes offered by the provider

This information has been assessed by the QA Team and a panel of EAs and, based on
this assessment, the remit, scope and duration of the inspections has been agreed.
Programmes will receive a 1, 1.5 or 2-day programme inspection; for some there will also
be an inspection of the ‘sign-up to finals’ procedures/final assessment/exam board.

1

By recent graduate, we mean someone who has graduated the programme, within the last five years.

7

The QA team will be contacting each of the BDS providers in July, explaining the duration
of the inspection and requesting dates for when the QA visit can take place. The QA officer
leading the inspection will also be in touch explaining the scope of the inspection, which
requirements we will focus on and the documentation required in advance.

8

5. Pre-inspection procedures and documents
The GDC QA Team will contact BDS/BChD providers in July 2018 indicating suitable dates
for the programme inspection and where relevant, request dates of final assessments and
examination board meetings. Programme inspections last from one to two days and, where
applicable, examination inspections will depend on the duration of the final assessments.
Examination inspections usually involve attendance at the examination board meeting.
Once inspection dates are agreed for both the programme and examination inspections (if
applicable) the QA Team will approach the panel of EAs for their availability. The same
panel will normally attend all elements of the inspection.
The demonstration of the achievement of the Standards for Education by providers is
central to the GDC QA process. Therefore, the scrutiny of the education providers annual
monitoring forms and other information noted above, provides the basis for the scope and
remit of the inspection at each institution. In the past, we sent out a request for providers to
supply information that demonstrates achievement of each requirement within the
Standards for Education, in advance of an inspection. However, most of this will have
already been covered by the information supplied through the annual monitoring and selfassessment therein. Between August and September 2018, the QA team will send out:
•

A request for additional information to support the self-assessment statement,
related to those aspects of the programme that are a focus of the inspection, further
to the scrutiny of the annual monitoring returns.

•

Learning outcomes mapping table: This table should demonstrate where and how
students are assessed against the relevant learning outcomes.

•

This guidance (which has been revised further to feedback from the education
provider workshop in early July 2018).

•

Standards for Education.

Providers are requested to send back the additional information and learning outcome
mapping within 10 weeks. We will include a deadline on the email we send out.
Further to the above, we may require additional information and will request this in advance
of the inspections as needed. We aim to give you as much notice as possible.
The new process aims to make the submission of documentation less burdensome to the
provider. However, the GDC expects that providers keep the necessary documentation and
student information up-to-date, regardless of whether or not they are being inspected.
A draft timetable for completion will be sent to you later in autumn 2018.

9

6. The Programme Inspection
During inspections, the inspection panel meets with staff involved with the management
and delivery of the programme and with students enrolled on it.
A full two-day inspection timetable will include the following:
•

A private meeting of the EAs will take place before any meetings with the provider
take place. This will enable them to look at any evidence not available prior to the
inspection (e.g. confidential and sensitive information).

•

The first meeting with the provider will usually be with the programme leads. This is
an introductory meeting and allows the panel to ask some general questions and to
explore whether there are issues that are not covered in the paperwork. The
programme leads should use this opportunity to ask the panel questions about any
aspect of the inspection they are unsure about and to raise issues at the outset of
the process.

•

The core inspection meetings should be separated into individual Standards from the
Standards for Education, where the inspection is looking at a number of
requirements that run across the standards. In this situation, the meeting in relation
to Standard One will require all relevant personnel to be in attendance to discuss
Patient Protection. For Standard Two, all key personnel involved in the programme’s
Quality Evaluation and Review will be needed. Finally, for Standard Three, all staff
with responsibilities in Student Assessment should attend. Despite their numbering,
there is no fixed rule regarding the order in which these meetings should appear in
the timetable. For inspections that are focused on particular requirements, the QA
officer leading the inspection will contact the provider to discuss the timetable and
agree a suitable agenda.

•

Where practical, meetings should be limited to 8 or fewer attendees. The panel will
want to hear from everyone during the meetings. The panel reserves the right to
request meetings with staff without senior managers or programme leads in
attendance.

•

The inspection timetable should allow for an early opportunity to meet with final year
students, followed by meetings with students from all earlier years through the
course of the visit. The QA team will advise on the number and selection process of
the students. This would normally be done by the QA officer requesting a list of
students by candidate number so that the panel can choose a random selection of
students to attend the meeting(s). Panels normally meet a maximum of 15-16
students per meeting. For shorter inspections, students from different year groups
may be asked to attend the same meeting.

•

In addition to the staff directly involved with the delivery and assessment of the
programme, the EAs may also need to speak to any staff involved in QA and
curriculum development and those working away from the central site, including
outreach tutors. Videoconference or teleconference may be used if travel to the main
school site is not practical for the inspection.

•

Where relevant, there will be time allocated in the timetable for the panel to spend
some time looking at the evidence provided in the meeting room.
10

•

The inspection panel will review their findings throughout the inspection. On
occasion the timetable may need to be revised at short notice if additional meetings
or an opportunity for EAs to discuss findings in private is required.

Meetings with senior university/NHS personnel (e.g. vice-chancellors/principals, faculty
deans, chief executives) or administrative staff (e.g. finance officers, library/IT staff) will not
typically be scheduled. However, there may be occasions where it would be helpful for the
inspection panel to meet with senior individuals or those responsible for specific issues and
so these might be included. Visits to outreach facilities will also not usually be conducted,
unless there is evidence to suggest it is necessary to do so.
For shorter inspections that are focused on a limited number of requirements, we will not
need to see all the areas noted above. In our correspondence with education providers over
summer we will make it clear what the scope and remit of the inspection to your specific
education provider is and when developing the timetable, we will make it clear what
groups/individuals we would like to see.
Regardless of the length of inspection, there will be specific topics which we will look at
across all providers, and these will be specified in emails to the providers.
At the programme inspection, the inspection panel will make a provisional judgement as to
whether requirements have been met, partly met, or not met.
In order to find that an individual requirement has been met the inspection panel must
agree that:
“There is sufficient appropriate evidence derived from the inspection process. This evidence
provides the inspectors with broad confidence that the provider demonstrates the
requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students is supportive of
documentary evidence and the evidence is robust, consistent and not contradictory. There
may be minor deficiencies in the evidence supplied but these are likely to be
inconsequential.”
The inspection panel will agree that an individual requirement has been partly met if:
“Evidence derived from the inspection process is either incomplete or lacks detail and, as
such, fails to convince the inspection panel that the provider fully demonstrates the
requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students may not fully
support the evidence submitted or there may be contradictory information in the evidence
provided. There is, however, some evidence of compliance and it is likely that either (a) the
appropriate evidence can be supplied in a short time frame, or, (b) any deficiencies
identified can be addressed and evidenced in the annual monitoring process.”
The inspection panel will agree that an individual requirement is not met if:
“The provider cannot provide evidence to demonstrate a requirement or the evidence
provided is not convincing. The information gathered at the inspection through meetings
with staff and students does not support the evidence provided or the evidence is
inconsistent and/or incompatible with other findings. The deficiencies identified are such as
to give rise to serious concern and will require an immediate action plan from the provider.
The consequences of not meeting a requirement in terms of the overall sufficiency of a
11

programme will depend upon the compliance of the provider across the range of
requirements and the possible implications for public protection.”
The inspection will end with an extended private meeting of the inspection panel.
Should the inspection panel agree that there are urgent issues that need to be addressed
immediately, we will inform you of this at the end of the inspection and follow this up with
written feedback within a week of the inspection. At this stage, the panel may also make an
urgent recommendation to the GDC registrar regarding the sufficiency of the programme for
registration.

12

7. The Assessment/Examination Inspection – this will not be relevant for
all education providers in 2018/19
This is undertaken at the point in the programme where key assessments are completed,
and the judgement is made as to whether students have achieved the learning outcomes to
qualify and seek to register with the GDC. The QA Officer will advise you whether some of
the panel will attend any ‘sign-up’ meeting that determines whether students should be
permitted to sit the final assessments.
During the exam inspection, the panel will observe assessments such as:
•

Case Presentations;

•

Objective Structured Clinical Exams (OSCEs);

•

Unseen case exams;

•

Clinical Scenario Papers and

•

Integrated Structured Clinical Exams (ISCEs)

It is understood that it is often impractical for the entire panel to attend individual
assessments. Therefore, to avoid overcrowding and any potential negative impact on
students, the EAs, where necessary, will take it in turns to observe parts of the
assessments.
The inspection panel will not normally attend written paper sittings, but the provider should
make the question papers and completed answer scripts available to the inspection team.
Meetings with staff or with students do not normally take place at this point, but the panel
will meet with external examiners and the programme leads.
In the panel’s’ meeting room, the inspection team will audit records of the clinical work that
has been completed. The panel will also review student logbooks and grades, written
papers and model answers, and work contributing to final marks (including exam scripts
and projects). The panel will attend relevant meetings where student performance is
discussed.

13

8. Assessment/Exam Meeting – this will not be relevant for all
education providers
Representatives of the inspection panel will normally attend the final assessment/exam
meeting (the forum for the verification of the final pass list) as observers. Attendance is to
ensure that due process has been followed and that there are no irregularities in the
establishment of the pass list.
There is usually no input from the EAs at this meeting, unless the panel have serious
concerns which must be raised as they consider that the graduating cohort of students are
not sufficiently trained or assessed to be classed as ‘safe beginners’. On occasion, issues
arising from this meeting will be included in the inspection report.

14

9. Inspection Reports and Registrar’s Decision
Final reports will contain a recommendation to the GDC from the inspection panel regarding
the sufficiency of a programme for registration of future graduating cohorts. The GDC
registrar has delegated powers from the Council to make a decision taking into account the
panel’s recommendation.
GDC inspection reports are centred on the achievement of the Standards for Education.
Reports will refer to the specific requirements which we addressed at the inspection.
Reports highlight where there is insufficient, contradictory or inadequate evidence to
demonstrate a requirement. Inputs such as IT and library facilities, funding or admissions
will not be discussed in reports unless these relate directly to any failure to meet a
requirement under the Standards.

15

10. Timescales
When the inspection dates have been set in early autumn 2018, the lead member from the
QA team, will share a timetable outlining key milestones for the duration of the inspection
and report writing process. It is intended that this will give a clearer indication of when
schools can expect to receive draft reports and when they will need to respond with
corrections and observations.
The draft report will be compiled by the inspection panel and will include the findings from
the programme and, if relevant, the examination inspection. Should the panel agree that
there are urgent issues that need to be addressed immediately, written feedback will be
given to the provider within a week of the first inspection.
The draft report will normally be completed within six to eight weeks of the completion of the
inspection, though competing operational commitments and EA availability may extend this
timeframe. We will communicate with you as early as possible if we do not think we can
achieve the original timetable and indicate when you will have a final version.

16

11. Factual Corrections and Observations
Once the inspection panel has completed their final draft, the report is sent to the provider
asking for any factual corrections on the content to be provided within ten working days.
The changes made here are purely factual and approval of these will made by the EAs.
Once approved, the provider will then be asked to provide any observations on the content
of the factually corrected, final report within one month of receipt. The observations must
address the content of the report and the actions required.
Please note: Providers will be given deadlines for when their factual corrections and
observations are due. Extensions to either deadline require a formal request to the GDC
QA Team. There is a maximum of one calendar month statutory period afforded to
providers for their observations under the Dentists Act. Once this has elapsed, the GDC
could take the decision to publish the report without observations being included.

17

12. Achievement of Requirements and Actions
Inspection reports contain commentary on the rationale for requirements being deemed
met, partly met or not met and will commend good practice where this is identified. Reports
also contain actions required of the provider. These actions focus on areas that impact
upon the achievement of the Standards for Education, particularly where it has been
determined that requirements have been partly met or not met.
Where an action is needed for a requirement to be met, the term ‘must’ is used within the
inspection report to describe the obligation on the provider to undertake this action. For
such actions a specific timescale will be stipulated by which the action must be completed,
or when an update on progress must be provided to the GDC. In their observations on the
content of the report, the provider should confirm the anticipated date by which these
actions will be completed.
Where an action would improve how a requirement is met, the term ‘should’ is used and for
these actions there will be no due date stipulated. Providers will be asked to report on the
progress in addressing the required actions through the annual monitoring process. Serious
concerns about a lack of progress may result in further inspections or other quality
assurance activity.

18

13. Inspectors’ Recommendation to the Registrar
Demonstration of the Standards for Education and underlying requirements is central to the
inspection panel’s recommendation regarding the sufficiency of a programme for
registration. However, the recommendation will not be solely based on a provider meeting a
specific number of requirements; it will be made with consideration of the programme as a
whole. The recommendation will be made with particular regard to the safety of patients:
either those treated by students on the programme or implications for future patients of
those who pass the programme.
The inspection panel will recommend that a programme is either:
A ‘Sufficient’ for registration, with or without some actions required;
B ‘Sufficient’ for registration, for one cohort only, pending further actions and further quality
assurance activity, including additional inspection(s) or programme re-submission; or
C Not ‘sufficient’ for registration
By recommending option A, that a programme is sufficient for registration, the inspection
panel has agreed that those who successfully complete the programme are fit to practise
and that the Standards for Education have been met or will be met subject to the
addressing of a number of actions required. The inspection panel is assured that patient
safety will not be compromised by the programme.
The inspection panel may recommend that a programme is sufficient for one cohort only
(option B). This option is recommended if the inspection panel has reached the conclusion
that, while the graduating cohort is deemed to have reached the level of safe beginner,
future cohorts may not reach this standard and the provider is required to address a
number of actions to provide further assurances.
The recommendation that a programme is not sufficient for registration (option C) will be
made if the inspection panel has serious concerns related to patient safety and the
programme/provider has not demonstrated a number of the Standards for Education and
has been unable to respond effectively to concerns raised during the inspection process.
If the panel find serious issues leading to a B or C decision, they will set out clear actions
required in order to bring about immediate improvements to allow the current cohort of
students to graduate. The type of action required will depend upon the issues identified.
Most commonly, these will be the need for remedial work or additional clinical activity.

19

14. Registrar’s Decision
The registrar may seek further information and advice from the provider or the EAs before
making a decision about the sufficiency of a programme. Where serious concerns have
arisen, the registrar may highlight that risks remain high and further inspections of a
programme are required. If the inspection panel recommends that a programme is not
sufficient for registration, the registrar will refer the decision to the Council of the GDC with
a view to making a representation to the Privy Council.
Following consideration by the registrar, the provider and the inspection panel are notified
of the sufficiency decision.

20

15. Publication of Report and Observations
The inspection report and the provider’s observations on the content of the report are
published on the GDC website once a final decision has been made.

21

www.gdc-uk.org

General Dental Council
37 Wimpole Street
London
W1G 8DQ
Phone: 020 7167 6000
Fax: 020 7224 3294

September 2018

