INSPECTION REPORT
Education Provider /
Awarding Body:

Glasgow Dental School

Programme / Award /
Qualification:

Bachelor of Dental Surgery (BDS)

Remit and purpose:

Full inspection referencing the Standards for
Education to determine the continuing
sufficiency of the award for the purpose of
registration with the General Dental Council
(GDC) as a dentist

Learning Outcomes:

The First Five Years

Programme inspection dates:

21 & 22 March 2013

Examination inspection
dates:

15 & 16 May 2013
24 May 2013
28 May 2013 (via teleconference)

Inspection panel:

Michael McCulley (Chair and Lay Member)
Iain Mackie (Dentist Member)
M Khalid Mushtaq (Dentist Member)
Edward Odell (Dentist Member)

GDC staff:

Peter Butler (Lead)
Kathryn Counsell-Hubbard

Outcome:

Recommended that the BDS remains sufficient
for registration as a dentist

Inspection summary
The inspectors were extremely impressed with the Glasgow BDS programme although there
were some areas where the inspectors felt would benefit from improvement and
development.
The pre-inspection documentation and evidence provided to the GDC was of a particularly
high standard, making the inspection process very much easier to undertake. The inspectors
would like to thank the staff responsible for putting together such comprehensive
information.
The inspectors were very struck by the cohesive nature of the Glasgow BDS programme.
Despite the large cohort size, the panel gained a very clear impression of how well the staff
and students work together as a team with effective communication channels in place. This
should be commended. Quality assurance processes in general are good but the inspectors
felt this was particularly true for outreach locations. Other impressive aspects of the
programme included the graduate attributes training week offered to students which the
panel felt gave excellent support to students nearing the next phase of their careers.
The support given to students through the mentoring scheme is yet another strength.
It was extremely pleasing to see that one of the major strengths at Glasgow were the
systems and procedures in place to monitor and review the programme effectively together
with the assessment structure which the inspectors felt was well understood by staff and
students alike.
The inspectors noted some areas where improvements might be made and these include
investigating methods of extending feedback on examination performance to all students
whether they pass or fail; expanding students’ exposure to working with other members of
the dental team; putting in place written protocols for students regarding how they should
raise patient safety concerns and improving longitudinal monitoring of clinical performance.
The inspectors wish to thank the staff, students, and external stakeholders involved with the
BDS programme for their co-operation and assistance with the inspection.

Inspection Process and Purpose of Inspection
1.

As part of its duty to protect patients and promote high standards within the professions
it regulates, the General Dental Council (GDC) quality assures the education and
training of student dentists and dental care professionals (DCPs) at institutions whose
qualifications enable the holder to apply for registration with the GDC and new
qualifications where it is intended that the qualification will lead to registration.

2.

The aim of this quality assurance activity is to ensure that these institutions produce a
new registrant who has demonstrated, on graduation, that he or she has met the
outcomes required for registration with the GDC. This is to ensure that students who
obtain a qualification are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner.

3.

The inspection focuses on four Standards, with a total of 29 underlying Requirements.
These are contained in the document Standards for Education.

4.

The purpose of this inspection was to make a recommendation to the Council of the
GDC regarding the ‘sufficiency’ of the programme for registration as a dentist in the UK.
The GDC’s powers are derived under Part II, Section 9 of the Dentists Act 1984 (as
amended) to determine sufficiency of the programme.

5.

Inspection reports may highlight areas of strength and draw attention to areas requiring
improvement and development, including actions that are required to be undertaken by
the provider. Where an action is needed for a Requirement to be met, the term ‘must’ is
used to describe the obligation on the provider to undertake this action. For these
actions the inspectors may stipulate a specific timescale by which the action must be
completed or when an update on progress must be provided. In their observations on
the content of the report, the provider should confirm the anticipated date by which
these actions will be completed. Where an action would improve how a Requirement is
met, the term ‘should’ is used and for these actions there will be no due date stipulated.
Providers will be asked to report on the progress in addressing the required actions
through the annual monitoring process. Serious concerns about a lack of progress may
result in further inspections or other quality assurance activity.

6.

The provider of the qualification has the opportunity to provide factual corrections on the
draft report. Following the production of the final report the provider is asked to submit
observations on, or objections to, the report and the actions listed. Where the inspection
panel have recommended that the programme is sufficient for registration, the Council
of the GDC have delegated responsibility to the GDC Registrar to consider the
recommendations of the panel. Should an inspection panel not be able to recommend
sufficiency, the report and observations would be presented to the Council of the GDC
for consideration.

The inspection
7.

This report sets out the findings of an inspection of the Bachelor of Dental Surgery
(BDS) awarded by The University of Glasgow. The GDC publication Standards for
Education (version 1.0 November 2012) was used as a framework for the inspection.
Inspection reports may highlight areas of strength and draw attention to areas requiring
improvement and development, including actions that are required to be undertaken by
the provider.

8.

The programme inspection took place on 21 and 22 March 2013. During the inspection,
the inspectors met staff involved with the management and delivery of the BDS
programme. The inspection team also met with clinical teaching staff, outreach tutors,
and students on the BDS programme.

9.

On 15 and 16 May 2013 the inspectors attended the practical elements of the final
examination. These were the Objective Structured Clinical Examination (OSCE) and the
Case Presentations.

10. The inspectors also attended on 24 May 2013 when the process for the Final
Examination Board meeting was explained to the inspectors. The meeting had been due
to take place on this date but was rescheduled at short notice due to the availability of
the external examiners. Some of the inspectors joined the Final Exam Board meeting on
28 May 2013 via teleconference.

Overview of qualification
11. The five year BDS programme is based primarily at the Glasgow Dental Hospital &
School. Each cohort is approximately 90 students strong. The programme aims to build
up the knowledge, skills and attitudes required to enter dental practice as a safe
beginner. To reflect this, the programme alters in emphasis, shifting from basic science
towards consolidation of clinical skills as students’ progress. NHS Health Boards, in
conjunction with the University of Glasgow and NHS Education for Scotland (NES),

provide outreach facilities across Scotland. By the time students reach the final year of
the programme, a large proportion of their time is spent working clinically in outreach.

Evaluation of Qualification against the Standards for Education
12. As stated above, the Standards for Education were used as a framework for this
inspection. Consideration was given to the fact that the Standards for Education were
approved in late 2012 and that it may take time for providers to make amendments to
programmes to meet all of the Requirements fully and to gather the evidence to
demonstrate that each Requirement is being met. The inspection panel were fully aware
of this and the findings of this report should be read with this in mind.
13. The provider was requested to undertake a self-evaluation of the programme against
the individual Requirements under the Standards for Education. This involved stating
whether each Requirement was met, partly met or not met and to provide evidence in
support of their evaluation. The inspection panel examined this evidence, requested
further documentary evidence and gathered further evidence from discussions with staff
and students.
14. The inspection panel used the following descriptors to reach a decision on the extent to
which the BDS of Glasgow Dental School meets each Requirement:
A Requirement is met if:
“There is sufficient appropriate evidence derived from the inspection process. This evidence
provides the inspectors with broad confidence that the provider demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students is supportive of
documentary evidence and the evidence is robust, consistent and not contradictory. There
may be minor deficiencies in the evidence supplied but these are likely to be
inconsequential.”
A Requirement is partly met if:
“Evidence derived from the inspection process is either incomplete or lacks detail and, as
such, fails to convince the inspection panel that the provider fully demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students may not fully
support the evidence submitted or there may be contradictory information in the evidence
provided. There is, however, some evidence of compliance and it is likely that either (a) the
appropriate evidence can be supplied in a short time frame, or, (b) any deficiencies identified
can be addressed and evidenced in the annual monitoring process.”
A Requirement is not met if:
“The provider cannot provide evidence to demonstrate a Requirement or the evidence
provided is not convincing. The information gathered at the inspection through meetings with
staff and students does not support the evidence provided or the evidence is inconsistent
and/or incompatible with other findings. The deficiencies identified are such as to give rise to
serious concern and will require an immediate action plan from the provider. The
consequences of not meeting a Requirement in terms of the overall sufficiency of a
programme will depend upon the compliance of the provider across the range of
Requirements and the possible implications for public protection.

Standard 1 – Protecting patients
Providers must be aware of their duty to protect the public. Providers must ensure that
patient safety is paramount and care of patients is of an appropriate standard. Any risk
to the safety of patients and their care by students must be minimised
Requirements
Met
Partly Not
met
met
1. Students will provide patient care only when they have
demonstrated adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical

procedures, the student should be assessed as competent in
the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients
2.

Patients must be made aware that they are being treated by
students and give consent



3.

Students will only provide patient care in an environment
which is safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with
relevant legislation and requirements regarding patient care



4.

When providing patient care and services, students are to be
supervised appropriately according to the activity and the
student’s stage of development.



5.

Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained.
Clinical supervisors must have appropriate general or
specialist registration with a regulatory body



6.

Students and those involved in the delivery of education and
training must be encouraged to raise concerns if they identify
any risks to patient safety

7.

Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be
taken by the provider

8.

Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and
apply as required. The content and significance of the student
fitness to practise procedures must be conveyed to students
and aligned to GDC student fitness to practise guidance. Staff
involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar
with the GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance







GDC comments
Requirement 1: Students will provide patient care only when they have demonstrated
adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical procedures, the student should be assessed
as competent in the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical environments
prior to treating patients (Requirement Met)
In the early stages of the BDS programme students undertake a series of pre-clinical and
clinical competence assessments. Key skills are assessed in the pre-clinical environment prior
to treating patients. The importance of these assessments, which test both theory and practical
skill, is made very clear to students who told the inspection team that the training they receive
in operative techniques m
eans they feel well prepared. The competence tests start with more basic tasks, such as hand
washing techniques, and build up to more complex tasks as the programme progresses.

Plans to enhance and expand the competence assessments look robust and comprehensive.
Repeat assessments may take place almost immediately for those students who it seems have
had a ‘bad day’. A later re-sit occurs for students requiring remediation. Additional diets may be
offered but the inspectors were pleased to learn that there comes a mutually agreed point
when it is decided a discussion needs to take place as to whether dentistry is the right choice
for a struggling student. The inspectors were told that students do withdraw from the
programme but high progress rates are attributed to the way the programme bring students up
to speed quickly.
Requirement 2: Patients must be made aware that they are being treated by students
and give consent (Requirement Met)
Joint procedures set up by the University and NHS Greater Glasgow & Clyde mean that
students cannot commence treatment until the patient gives formal consent to be treated by a
student. The inspectors had sight of the policy document which sets out the requirements for
consent as well as the information provided to patients prior to being treated.

Requirement 3: Students will only provide patient care in an environment which is safe
and appropriate. The provider must comply with relevant legislation and requirements
regarding patient care (Requirement Met)
The work undertaken by students is performed largely in NHS facilities that must comply with
NHS Health and Safety policies. Representatives from The University of Glasgow attend NHS
Clinical Governance Committee meetings. There are clear Health and Safety policies in place
and students receive excellent levels of supervision while working on clinics (see further
comments under Requirement 4).
Considerable investment in the facilities at the School in recent times has benefitted staff and
students alike. The inspectors were pleased to learn, from discussions with student groups,
that the new facilities are well-liked and that refurbishments have been carried out with the
minimum of disruption. The investment in providing brand new, state-of-the-art facilities will
continue over the coming months and years. Facilities provided in outreach were also reported
to be of a high standard. The inspection team was pleased to learn that students receive close
nursing support while working in outreach placements.
Requirement 4: When providing patient care and services, students are to be
supervised appropriately according to the activity and the student’s stage of
development (Requirement Met)
There is clearly confidence in the staff team from senior management. A relatively recent
restructure of the staff complement has led to some strategic recruitment. The inspectors were
pleased to learn that there is an emphasis on nurturing and developing junior staff members.
Succession planning is in place in order to maintain the strength of the teaching team. The
staffing strategy also identifies areas for improvement such as restorative dentistry. Clinical
teaching staff are recruited against detailed person specifications.
It is anticipated that when students are working on clinics there will be no more than seven
students per supervising member of staff. Commonly, staff:student ratios are better than this.
Students the panel spoke with confirmed this and said they felt that a member of staff was
always close at hand to assist with any issues or problems. The panel were told that, for Year
1 in particular, there is close support for students as they commence what can often be a very

different way of learning for some. Staff keep in close contact in order to manage anxiety
regarding assessments and to assist them as they develop a more mature learning style. This
includes an introductory programme relating to reflective learning and various ‘taster’ sessions.
Students are also assigned a member of staff who will act as their mentor throughout their time
at the Glasgow Dental School.
It is recognised by the School that there are many ways in which a student might struggle and,
as such, efforts are made to ensure they are supported in many different ways. When students
take time out from study, tailored programmes are devised for them on their return to the
School. The panel were pleased to hear that students feel well cared for and appreciate the
strong sense of community within the School. Low levels of attrition and good progression
rates would seem to support this. One exemplar of the support received by students is the
‘graduate attributes week’ in which they are given guidance on vocational training, CV writing
skills, and general careers advice.
Requirement 5: Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained. Clinical
supervisors must have appropriate general or specialist registration with a regulatory
body (Requirement Met)
Clinical supervisors all have the appropriate registration and there is a detailed training
programme in place that includes peer observations and feedback. Part-time teaching staff all
take part in an induction programme that covers teaching and assessment. They are also
timetabled with an academic member of staff on clinics.
While attending training sessions is not mandatory, this is encouraged by offering time off in
lieu. Many members of the team visit only two days each week, or less, so it can be difficult to
manage provision of training, however, the panel were told that training sessions were well
attended in general. All outreach tutors are included in in-house training sessions.
Requirement 6: Students and those involved in the delivery of education and training
must be encouraged to raise concerns if they identify any risks to patient safety
(Requirement Partly Met)
Policies are in place to cover professional conduct, whistleblowing and codes of conduct but
there is no specific written protocol to cover raising concerns. When the inspection team spoke
with students they said that staff were always available to discuss problems or issues,
especially during clinical sessions. Given the large cohort size, the School should be
commended for managing to maintain a close-knit sense of community within the programme
which was very evident to the inspection team. The panel felt, however, that students had a
fairly limited grasp of wider patient safety issues. The School recognises that there is a need to
develop written protocols for students relating to whistleblowing and raising concerns about
patient safety. If a student was unsure of the appropriate course of action to take, there is
currently nothing written down and aimed specifically at explaining what they would need to do.
Putting this in place should be a relatively straightforward task to undertake and complete. The
School acknowledge that care needs to be taken to ensure that any written protocols being
introduced fit in with NHS systems already in place.
The panel were told that methods of promoting current procedures and making them better
understood by the staff team need to be identified. It was thought that effecting a culture
change among staff and students will take time. For these reasons, the inspectors agreed with
the School’s own assessment that this Requirement is partly met.

Requirement 7: Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be taken by
the provider (Requirement Met)
The panel saw evidence of how specific issues had been handled. One related to handpiece
safety. The inspectors also saw more general evidence relating to the capture of information
about clinical incidents. There are policies and procedures in place that have been agreed by
the University together with the NHS so that any safety issues which may arise are dealt with
appropriately and resolved in a timely fashion. This is overseen by the Clinical Governance
Committee.
Requirement 8: Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and apply as
required. The content and significance of the student fitness to practise procedures
must be conveyed to students and aligned to GDC student fitness to practise guidance.
Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar with the GDC Student
Fitness to Practise Guidance (Requirement Met)
There is a University-wide policy that covers fitness to practise. Students are required to sign
up to a code of practice that includes the GDC Student Fitness to Practise guidance. They are
required to do this on an annual basis which reaffirms the importance of the policy with the
students. Further information, case studies and other resources and are made available to staff
and students via the online Moodle system. The inspectors were satisfied that any potential
Fitness to Practise issues would be identified at an early stage and the necessary action taken.

Actions
Req.
Number

6

Actions
Written protocols on raising concerns which are currently
being put together must be completed and distributed as
soon as is practicable. Further work needs to be done in
order to ensure new policies are widely understood by
both staff and students alike.

Due date
Update to be
provided
through the
2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

Standard 2 – Quality evaluation and review of the programme
The provider must have in place effective policy and procedures for the monitoring and
review of the programme
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
9. The provider will have a framework in place that details how it
manages the quality of the programme which includes

making appropriate changes to ensure the curriculum
continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and
adapts to changing legislation and external guidance. There
must be a clear statement about where responsibility lies for
this function
10. The provider will have systems in place to quality assure



placements
11. Any problems identified through the operation of the quality

management framework must be addressed as soon as
possible
12. Should quality evaluation of the programme identify any



serious threats to the students achieving learning outcomes
through the programme, the GDC must be notified at the
earliest possible opportunity



13. Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external



quality assurance procedures
14. External examiners must be utilised and must be familiar with

the learning outcomes and their context. Providers should
follow QAA guidelines on external examining where
applicable
15. Providers must consider and, where appropriate, act upon





concerns raised or formal reports on the quality of education
and assessment
GDC comments
Requirement 9: The provider will have a framework in place that details how it manages
the quality of the programme which includes making appropriate changes to ensure the
curriculum continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and adapts to
changing legislation and external guidance. There must be a clear statement about
where responsibility lies for this function (Requirement Met)
The evidence provided to the inspectors prior to the inspection demonstrated a clear and
coherent approach to quality assurance of the programme. Aligned with this is a cyclical
approach operating on different timescales. There is a process of annual monitoring where
feedback is collected and analysed to establish where change may be necessary followed by
additional monitoring to check any changes have been implemented successfully. There is a
longer term cycle in place that includes review by the University, the GDC and other external
bodies.
Feedback is crucial to the Quality Assurance mechanisms at Glasgow. It is collected widely
from staff, students, patients, external examiners and other stakeholders and the inspectors
felt this added great value to the process.

There has been a conscious effort to avoid subject silos and this has meant encouraging staff
to focus on the curriculum as a whole rather than concentrating specifically on their own areas
of expertise. This more holistic approach was clear to the inspectors and the panel supports
the way in which this helps to bring about more effective and timely change.
Requirement 10: The provider will have systems in place to quality assure placements
(Requirement Met)
Outreach is a major element of the Glasgow BDS programme and this has been the case for
many years. It is held in high regard by both the staff and students. The outreach scheme
garners extremely positive feedback. The Outreach Co-ordinator ensures that staff in outreach
locations are well integrated with the rest of the programme through a rotation of regular visits,
two days each week, to each location. The inspectors’ viewed this as excellent practice
because it enables them to discern any deviation from the expected teaching style or system.
There are also opportunities to monitor students who may have been struggling in the School
environment to ascertain whether the change helps them improve and develop.
Tutors in outreach are given regular, tailored training to support them throughout the
programme including an annual outreach teachers’ day, which can often be an opportunity to
raise concerns or issues. Outreach tutors are also included in in-house training sessions and
this provided the inspectors with a sense of how well integrated into the overall BDS
programme they are. A trial scheme of peer observation of teaching is due to be extended
across all outreach locations, which the inspectors viewed as excellent progress. Students also
undertake an audit project in outreach and this is used to help standardise student experience
across all locations.
The inspectors saw excellent evidence of feedback obtained regarding the outreach provision.
During the final year, students spend every other week out in placements and this allows staff
to keep in touch with them during the time they are based in the School. The School
recognises that there can be variations in experience across the various locations but every
effort was being made to make students’ experiences as comparable as possible.
Requirement 11: Any problems identified through the operation of the quality
management framework must be addressed as soon as possible (Requirement Met)
The monitoring of feedback and, subsequently, the monitoring of changes made as a result of
feedback means that issues are addressed in a timely fashion. The inspectors saw clear
evidence of standard agendas for Committees that included standing items to report on action
points. The panel were happy to note that this meant actions were followed up appropriately.
Detailed information was provided regarding the various Committees in place and how these
function and interact with one another.
At the conclusion of each academic year, the Year Co-ordinator responsible for each year of
the BDS programme provides a report including any actions required. Student representatives
(four per year group) also interact on a formal basis with Year Co-ordinators to input into any
prospective changes. Students the panel spoke with said that student representatives were
always approachable.
The inspectors were pleased to be told that staff felt empowered to effect change where they
saw it as needed and that they were given sufficient opportunities to raise concerns; those who
raised issues were often involved in the process of putting things right.

Requirement 12: Should quality evaluation of the programme identify any serious
threats to the students achieving learning outcomes through the programme, the GDC
must be notified at the earliest possible opportunity (Requirement Met)
There have not been any serious threats to the programme that have required the GDC to be
notified. Evidence the inspectors saw supported this and we could also see, through evidence
supplied regarding the wider quality assurance mechanisms employed by the School, where
issues requiring attention had been dealt with in an expedient manner.

Requirement 13: Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external quality
assurance procedures (Requirement Met)
As noted under Requirement 9, the programme is subject to a cycle of longer-term quality
assurance procedures that involve the University’s periodic review, GDC inspections as well as
input from other external bodies and other influences (such as the National Student Survey).
The University periodic review involves completion of a self-assessment form that is followed
up with a visit to the School. The inspection team were given sight of the documentation
relating to the most recent periodic review which took place in 2010.
Requirement 14: External examiners must be utilised and must be familiar with the
learning outcomes and their context. Providers should follow Quality Assurance
Agency (QAA) guidelines on external examining where applicable (Requirement Met)
QAA guidelines are firmly embedded within the policies and procedures the School has in
place for external examiners. Extremely clear guidance is provided to external examiners
regarding their role and responsibilities and how this fits in with the wider responsibilities of the
School itself. External Examiners the inspection team spoke with felt they were being utilised
correctly and were able to carry out their function efficiently and effectively.
Requirement 15: Providers must consider and, where appropriate, act upon concerns
raised or formal reports on the quality of education and assessment (Requirement Met)
Please also see comments made throughout the rest of Standard 2.
The University periodic review produces a report which outlines improvements which could be
made to the education provision within the dental school. The inspectors noted that there is a
real team approach to making changes and dealing with issues with an impressive approach to
using feedback to inform improvements. The inspection panel were pleased to hear that there
is a good deal of discussion between staff and that problems are looked at by the entire team
in order to achieve a resolution. The inspectors felt this was clearly an effective method of
tackling potential problems and the panel hopes this approach continues to thrive.

Actions
Req.
Number
-

Actions
-

Due date
-

Standard 3– Student assessment
Assessment must be reliable and valid. The choice of assessment method must be
appropriate to demonstrate achievement of the GDC learning outcomes. Assessors
must be fit to perform the assessment task
Requirements
Met
Partly Not
met
met
16. To award the qualification, providers must be assured that
students have demonstrated attainment across the full range

of learning outcomes, at a level sufficient to indicate they are
safe to begin practice. This assurance should be underpinned
by a coherent approach to aggregation and triangulation, as
well as the principles of assessment referred to in these
standards.
17. The provider will have in place management systems to plan,



monitor and record the assessment of students throughout
the programme against each of the learning outcomes
18. Assessment must involve a range of methods appropriate to

the learning outcomes and these should be in line with
current practice and routinely monitored, quality assured and
developed
19. Students will have exposure to an appropriate breadth of



patients/procedures and will undertake each activity relating
to patient care on sufficient occasions to enable them to
develop the skills and the level of competency to achieve the
relevant GDC learning outcomes



20. The provider should seek to improve student performance by



encouraging reflection and by providing feedback1.
21. Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills,

experience and training to undertake the task of assessment,
appropriate general or specialist registration with a regulatory
body
22. Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent

to which assessment processes are rigorous, set at the
correct standard, ensure equity of treatment for students and
have been fairly conducted
23. Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear







criteria. Standard setting must be employed for summative
assessments
24. Where appropriate, patient/peer/customer feedback should

contribute to the assessment process
25. Where possible, multiple samples of performance must

be taken to ensure the validity and reliability of the
assessment conclusion
1





Reflective practice should not be part of the assessment process in a way that risks effective student use

26. The standard expected of students in each area to be

assessed must be clear and students and staff involved
in assessment must be aware of this standard



GDC comments
Requirement 16: To award the qualification, providers must be assured that students
have demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes, at a level
sufficient to indicate they are safe to begin practice. This assurance should be
underpinned by a coherent approach to aggregation and triangulation, as well as the
principles of assessment referred to in these standards (Requirement Met)
There is a clear assessment strategy and structure and this is well described for students so
that they understand how and why they are being assessed. The end point of each year of
study has clear progression requirements students must meet in order to continue, so that
each year of study can be viewed almost as a separate course of study. Key safety issues,
such as infection control and basic life support, are assessed regularly. The programme has
been designed so that students build the knowledge, skills and attitudes required to practice
dentistry as a safe beginner. There is also a movement, as the student develops, from an
emphasis on underpinning scientific knowledge to clinical practice. By the final year, much of
students’ time is taken up working clinically and this includes up to 16 weeks in outreach. Since
didactic teaching is completed by the end of Year 4, the written assessment element of ‘Finals’
occurs at this point. The panel saw evidence of a transparent blueprinting system, linking each
assessment to the GDC learning outcomes; standard setting and psychometric analysis are
both used for every summative assessment. Further to this, the inspectors were able to
establish that an understanding of the standard setting procedures is filtered down to all staff
through each Year Co-ordinator. The embedding of the new curriculum has also assisted with
this. Staff are confident that it would not be possible for a student to complete the programme
without the requisite skills and knowledge.
Students have various opportunities to experience working with other members of the dental
team although not all students will get all opportunities. These include working jointly on
patients with hygienists and therapists, visiting dental laboratories to meet with technicians and
gain an understanding of how to prescribe, working with the support of dedicated dental nurses
in outreach and observing hygiene and therapy clinics. Year 5 students also help to mentor
Year 1 students on clinic in taking impressions. The inspectors felt this was a good example of
peer assisted learning and helps BDS1 students to understand what they are working towards.
Students have less contact with Dental Care Professionals (DCPs) in the hospital setting. In
outreach they will either have direct contact with or will learn about the functions of DCPs. The
team of inspectors all agreed that there was further scope for experience of working with other
members of the dental team and that this should be explored by the School.
Requirement 17: The provider will have in place management systems to plan, monitor
and record the assessment of students throughout the programme against each of the
learning outcomes (Requirement Partly Met)
The School are in the process of moving to the use of the Liverpool Longitudinal Integrative
Foundation Training Undergraduate to Postgraduate Pathway (LIFTUPP) system for recording
clinical assessments in a more longitudinal manner than is currently the case. It is planned that
LIFTUPP will be piloted during the 2013/14 academic year with full implementation taking
place the following year. There will be an academic member of staff responsible for the
introduction of LIFTUPP within the School. The inspectors saw evidence of the current Record
of Clinical Assessments and Feedback (ReCAF) which includes summative records of clinical
achievements and records of completion of programme requirements.

Upkeep of the current system is time consuming and staff believe the new LIFTUPP system
should go some way to alleviate this burden and allow greater analysis of student
performance. In recent times, the School ensured that the full range of clinical procedures was
recorded routinely. Given the School are in a period of transition between two systems, the
panel agree with the School’s assessment that this requirement is partly met.
Requirement 18: Assessment must involve a range of methods appropriate to the
learning outcomes and these should be in line with current practice and routinely
monitored, quality assured and developed (Requirement Met)
Evidence of transparent blueprinting of assessments combined with clear standard setting and
monitoring of assessment reliability demonstrates that the School are easily meeting this
requirement. The panel saw further evidence relating to the conduct of team meetings and
Teaching Committee meetings which deal with the review and development of assessments.
The inspection team attended the case presentation and OSCE examinations as part of the
inspection process and felt that these were extremely well organised, especially given the size
of the cohort.
Requirement 19: Students will have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and will undertake each activity relating to patient care on
sufficient occasions to enable them to develop the skills and the level of competency to
achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes (Requirement Met)
The School provides students with suggested targets for levels of clinical experience but these
are not relied on solely as an indication of competence. Students must complete competence
assessments at various stages of the programme. See additional comments under
Requirement 1.
Evidence the inspectors were shown suggested that students generally manage to achieve
more than the recommended clinical targets and students the inspectors spoke with confirmed
this. Students met by the inspectors told them that they would like the opportunity to have more
oral surgery sessions to extend their experience in this area. The panel would support this. The
inspectors noted that some students may gain additional experience depending on the
outreach locations they attend. The School recognises that it is not always easy to provide the
right types of patient at the time they are needed. Patients will often not require the types of
treatment the students need to carry out. The School must continue to seek ways of working
around this common difficulty.
Requirement 20: The provider should seek to improve student performance by
encouraging reflection and by providing feedback (Requirement Met)
It was clear that reflection is a major component of the Glasgow programme and this is instilled
from the very earliest stages of Year 1. In fact, formative assessments and the feedback
provided on them are seen as a crucial method of managing expectations and students’
perceptions of low grades in a group of academic high achievers. Students are provided with
excellent guidance regarding the need for reflection and how to get the best out of the
reflective portfolio they are required to complete. Students are also required to submit reflective
reports to their mentors each year. They meet with mentors on a regular basis to develop their
skills in reflecting on their performance. These reports and discussions can also feed into
personal development plans. After assessments, generic feedback is provided to the year
group as a whole while candidates failing to pass assessments are met with individually. This

can often help to bring underlying problems or issues to the surface. In some cases, students
who have not failed a particular assessment might seek individual feedback if, for example,
they have not scored as highly as they anticipated. However, this is not the norm and the
inspectors would like to see feedback provided regardless of the performance standard. The
panel do appreciate that, given the large cohort size, this may be difficult to achieve.
Requirement 21: Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills, experience and
training to undertake the task of assessment, appropriate general or specialist
registration with a regulatory body (Requirement Met)
Academic staff undertake the Postgraduate Certificate in Academic Practice and the Dental
School provides training on a regular basis with a specific focus on assessment. NonUniversity staff who are involved in the assessment process are required to be approved
annually to undertake their role. In order to ensure consistency, they are carefully briefed and
mentored.
Requirement 22: Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent to which
assessment processes are rigorous, set at the correct standard, ensure equity of
treatment for students and have been fairly conducted (Requirement Met)
The inspection panel were given sight of all external examiner reports for the previous three
years which met these criteria. During the Final Examination Board meeting, which was
attended by members of the inspection team by teleconference, the External Examiners were
offered the opportunity to make a preliminary, verbal report on the assessments they have
been engaged in. See also comments in relation to Requirement 14.
Requirement 23: Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear criteria.
Standard setting must be employed for summative assessments (Requirement Met)
There are clear and transparent procedures and policies in place which deal with how
examinations need to be prepared. The same is also true for how results are arrived at and this
report covers elsewhere how well the standard setting procedures are shared with, and
understood by, staff delivering the programme and students. The Final Examination Board
meeting process was explained to the inspectors very clearly and the panel were satisfied that
it was conducted in a fair and transparent manner.
Requirement 24: Where appropriate, patient/peer/customer feedback should contribute
to the assessment process (Requirement Met)
The inspectors saw evidence that various forms of feedback are collected. Feedback is used
formatively but any major issues raised as a result of feedback can be identified and managed.
The panel saw evidence of peer-assisted learning where Year 1 and Year 5 students assess
work together before tutors provide feedback. During OSCE examinations, feedback on
students’ communication skills is gathered.
During Year 4, students are required to distribute a patient feedback questionnaire to their
patients that includes questions relating to the treatment they have received. Students then
receive an overall analysis of the results as well as their own individual results so they are able
to see how they compare with the rest of the year group.
The School recognises that patient feedback is not always very helpful or useful and the

inspection panel understands why this might be the case, particularly where feedback is largely
positive in nature. Methods of improving the usefulness of patient feedback therefore need
investigation.
Requirement 25: Where possible, multiple samples of performance must be taken to
ensure the validity and reliability of the assessment conclusion (Requirement Met)
The blueprinting documentation showed that the learning outcomes are covered well across all
five years of the programme. The final examinations cover all aspects of the curriculum. Please
see comments relating to Requirement 18 for more information on the reliability of
assessments.
Documentation relating to ReCAF seen by the panel show that procedures are assessed
formatively on a variety of occasions. These are then assessed summatively as part of the
competence assessments students take prior to treating patients or after a period of
supervised clinical practice. Key topics such as infection control are assessed regularly.
Requirement 26: The standard expected of students in each area to be assessed must
be clear and students and staff involved in assessment must be aware of this standard
(Requirement Met)
The inspectors were pleased to learn that students they met with had a clear understanding of
how standards are set within the School. They are provided with clear guidance on what is
expected of them and they know where to locate such information via the ‘Moodle’ dynamic
learning environment. There is a strong awareness of the procedures involved in assessing
their achievements and they know how to find out which learning outcomes are being
assessed and what marking scheme is being used.
Staff at all levels also seem well informed. The generic feedback sessions given to student
groups after each assessment give them an idea of where they stand against their peers and
gives them a sense of how they need to improve to reach a higher standard. They can
understand where they may have gone wrong. Some students did feel the 9-grade system was
a little cumbersome and there was some degree of variation in applying these, which was
reported to the panel.

Actions
Req.
Number

Actions

17

A report on the pilot of the LIFTUPP programme must
be provided. If the system is not then fully rolled out,
the School must explain how this Requirement will be
addressed.

20

The School should investigate how it might improve
feedback on examination/assessment performance to
all students regardless of whether they pass or fail.

24

Methods of gathering more useful patient feedback
should be established.

Due date
Update to be
provided
through the
2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

26

The School should continue to work at reducing
variations in grading and the application of the
grading scheme.

Standard 4 – Equality and diversity
The provider must comply with equal opportunities and discrimination legislation and
practice. They must also advocate this practice to students
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
27. Providers must adhere to current legislation and best practice

guidance relating to equality and diversity
28. Staff will receive training on equality and diversity,

development and appraisal mechanisms will include this
29. Providers will convey to students the importance of

compliance with equality and diversity law and principles both
during training and after they begin practice






GDC comments
Requirement 27: Providers must adhere to current legislation and best practice
guidance relating to equality and diversity (Requirement Met)
Students told the inspectors that they felt fairly treated and provided for in terms of time off for
religious holidays and provision of a dedicated prayer room. All committees within the School
have standing agenda items to cover issues relating to equality and diversity. This helps
ensure such matters are not forgotten, delayed or side-lined. The University of Glasgow
provides centralised support, should this be required, via a dedicated Equality and Diversity
Unit. Evidence given to the inspectors showed how significant issues in this area have been
managed.
Requirement 28: Staff will receive training on equality and diversity, development and
appraisal mechanisms will include this (Requirement Met)
Training in equality and diversity is a University requirement for all employees. A new, online
training system has been introduced and all members of staff must complete this. Completion
certificates for all staff were made available to the panel. There is an equality and diversity
champion at university level and discussions are on-going as to whether there is the need for a
champion at School level. Any member of staff whose training on equality and diversity issues
has been received outside of the School or University is required to provide documentary
evidence of this.
Requirement 29: Providers will convey to students the importance of compliance with
equality and diversity law and principles both during training and after they begin
practice (Requirement Met)
Much of the required training for students is provided during the special care dentistry course.
Students undertake community placements in deprived areas at an early stage of the
programme and this provides early experience of the diversity of the local population. The
student body itself is a diverse group. Emphasis is placed throughout the programme on the
need to engage positively with equality and diversity policy during their training and into
vocational training and the rest of their working lives. Professionalism is also constantly
emphasised during the programme. The students understand they have signed up to
professional behaviour and a certain approach to their work and all University policies are
provided to them in BDS handbooks.

Actions
Req.
Number
-

Actions
-

Due date
-

Summary of Actions
Req.

Actions

Number
6

17

Observations

Due date

Response from Provider
Written protocols on raising concerns that are
currently being written must be completed and
distributed as soon as is practicable. Further work
needs to be done in order to ensure that new
policies are widely understood by both staff and
students.

A report on the pilot of the LIFTUPP programme
must be provided. If the system is not then fully
rolled out, the School must explain how this
Requirement will be addressed.

•

A protocol for students on Raising
Concerns has been produced and is
attached. This has been approved by the
Dental Education Committee and has been
publicised to students and staff via email. It
will be further disseminated via staffstudent liaison committees and teaching
committees, and will be placed in the BDS
Handbook section of Moodle.

•

A recently revised NHS Greater Glasgow &
Clyde policy on Whistelblowing is attached.
NHS and honorary clinical staff will be
alerted to this via a Team Brief document
and through the Clinical Director – Lead
Clinician structure.
Familiarisation of key academic staff with
the assessment processes in LIFTUPP has
begun and we anticipate no difficulty in
assimilating the system into the Glasgow
BDS curriculum.

•

•

We continue to work with NHS Partners to
address patient confidentiality and IT
issues. There are significant challenges but
we are exploring a number of options to
overcome these.

Update to be
provided through
the 2014 GDC
Annual Monitoring
exercise

Update to be
provided through
the 2014 GDC
Annual Monitoring
exercise

20

The School should investigate how it might
improve feedback on examination/assessment
performance to all students regardless of whether
they pass or fail.

•

The pilot is planned for May-July 2014

•

The School notes the inspector’s N/A
comments, in relation to requirements 20
and 26, concerning the use of generic
feedback. In relation to requirement 26, the
inspectors note that students consider the
generic feedback to be effective; the
School concurs with this evaluation.

•

The Dental Education Committee will
continue to explore means of improving the
usefulness of generic feedback, including
the use of Moodle. The School currently
utilises features of the examination
software Speedwell to provide feedback on
MCQ examinations in BDS1. This will be
extended to all summative MCQ papers.

•

The School will consider how students
might be helped to understand and utilise
feedback effectively. It will also explore
feed-forward
approaches
and
peer
assessment
to
enhance
student
understanding of marking criteria.

•

The University has recently established a
working group on examination feedback,
chaired by the Deputy Head of the Dental
School. The School will seek to implement
any recommendations of this working
group.

24

26

Methods of gathering more useful patient
feedback should be established.

The School should continue to work at reducing
variation in grading and the application of the
grading scheme.

•

Dental Education Committee will consider N/A
how this might be achieved and will look
specifically at improving the existing
questionnaire and its distribution to
patients. Electronic means of gathering
patient feedback will be considered and we
note that this is a feature of LIFTUPP.

•

We will investigate the options of random
telephone surveys and focus groups.

•

Examiner/assessor training and calibration N/A
will continue to feature in regular in-service
training events. We will also look to
develop on-line resources.

•

The
introduction
of
LIFTUPP
will
necessitate the adoption of a new grading
scale with associated descriptors. This will
provide a focus for the re-calibration of all
staff. The automatic recording of all grades
will allow the identification of grading
outliers
and
facilitate
appropriate
intervention.

Observations from the provider on the content of the report
The School would like to thank the inspectors for the efficient and thorough way in which the inspection process was conducted. The inspectors
had clearly taken great care to read the documentation provided by the School. We note that the report and actions are well-aligned to
Standards for Education and the School is grateful for the recommendations for improvement.

Recommendation to the GDC
The inspectors recommend that this qualification is sufficient for holders to apply for registration as a dentist with the General Dental Council.

