INSPECTION REPORT
Education Provider /
Awarding Body:

King’s College, London Dental School

Programme / Award /
Qualification:

Bachelor of Dental Surgery (BDS)

Remit and purpose:

Full inspection referencing the Standards for
Education to determine the continuing
sufficiency of the award for the purpose of
registration with the General Dental Council
(GDC) as a dentist

Learning Outcomes:

The First Five Years

Programme inspection dates:

12 & 13 December 2012

Examination inspection
dates:

3, 4, 5 & 6 June 2013

Inspection panel:

Philip Bunnell (Chair and Lay Member)
Ann Shearer (Dentist Member)
M Khalid Mushtaq (Dentist Member)
Michael Mulcahy (Dentist Member)

GDC staff:

Peter Butler (Lead)
Ross Scales (Programme)
Kathryn Counsell-Hubbard (Examinations)

Outcome:

Recommended that the BDS remains sufficient
for registration as a dentist

Inspection summary
The inspectors were extremely pleased to note so many positive aspects to the BDS
programme at King’s although there were some areas where the inspectors felt would
benefit from improvement and development.
The inspection panel was impressed with the high standard of the documentation received in
advance of the inspection and found that the evidence demonstrating each Requirement
was easy to find. There is a clear framework in place for managing the quality of the
programme and this was well evidenced before and during the inspection process.
There is a strong pre-clinical element to the programme which provides students with
excellent preparation before commencing treatment on patients. Students particularly liked
being able to work with patients at an early stage in the programme. The inspectors were
impressed with the levels of confidence among the student groups they met. The inspectors
could clearly see development of students as they moved through the programme stages
and were satisfied that upon graduation the students were fit to practise as safe beginners.
Also impressive was the way in which such a large group of students is managed and this
was particularly clear when observing assessments. However, the multi-site set-up at King’s
means there can be difficulties to overcome. For example, protocols may vary across
locations and this needs to be monitored. The inspectors felt that the support and
supervision offered to students in all locations was of a high standard.
The new outreach location in West Norwood, South London, will be an excellent addition to
the programme and will be a major benefit to the students undertaking the BDS programme,
especially those who are unable to attend available sessions in Portsmouth.
Students need to have a stronger understanding of the need to raise concerns relating to
patient safety and the ways in which they can do this. The inspectors gained the sense that
those students they met with lacked clarity in this area.
The inspectors were disappointed to learn that decisions made regarding the fitness to
practise of some students had, in the past, been overturned by the University. The
inspectors feel strongly that the School must be given the autonomy to make decisions
about the suitability of students on the BDS programme.
A new electronic recording system for students’ clinical activity is under development and the
demonstration provided to the inspectors showed that this will make a real difference to the
ability of staff to monitor students’ development. The inspectors hope that this can be
introduced as soon as possible so that all involved can benefit from it. Feedback from
patients also needs to be integrated into the assessment mechanisms in place.
The School needs to ensure that all staff receive the appropriate training in equality and
diversity.
The inspectors wish to thank the staff, students, and external stakeholders involved with the
BDS programme for their co-operation and assistance with the inspection.

Inspection process and purpose of inspection
1.

As part of its duty to protect patients and promote high standards within the professions
it regulates, the General Dental Council (GDC) quality assures the education and
training of student dentists and dental care professionals (DCPs) at institutions whose
qualifications enable the holder to apply for registration with the GDC and new
qualifications where it is intended that the qualification will lead to registration.

2.

The aim of this quality assurance activity is to ensure that these institutions produce a
new registrant who has demonstrated, on graduation, that he or she has met the
outcomes required for registration with the GDC. This is to ensure that students who
obtain a qualification leading to registration are fit to practise at the level of a safe
beginner.

3.

The inspection focuses on four Standards, with a total of 29 underlying Requirements.
These are contained in the document Standards for Education.

4.

The purpose of this inspection was to make a recommendation to the Council of the
GDC regarding the ‘sufficiency’ of the programme for registration as a dentist in the UK.
The GDC’s powers are derived under Part II, Section 9 of the Dentists Act 1984 (as
amended) to determine sufficiency of the programme.

5.

Inspection reports may highlight areas of strength and draw attention to areas requiring
improvement and development, including actions that are required to be undertaken by
the provider. Where an action is needed for a Requirement to be met, the term ‘must’ is
used to describe the obligation on the provider to undertake this action. For these
actions the inspectors may stipulate a specific timescale by which the action must be
completed or when an update on progress must be provided. In their observations on
the content of the report, the provider should confirm the anticipated date by which
these actions will be completed. Where an action would improve how a Requirement is
met, the term ‘should’ is used and for these actions there will be no due date stipulated.
Providers will be asked to report on the progress in addressing the required actions
through the annual monitoring process. Serious concerns about a lack of progress may
result in further inspections or other quality assurance activity.

6.

The provider of the qualification has the opportunity to provide factual corrections on the
draft report. Following the production of the final report the provider is asked to submit
observations on, or objections to, the report and the actions listed. Where the inspection
panel have recommended that the programme be approved for registration, the Council
of the GDC have delegated responsibility to the GDC Registrar to consider the
recommendations of the panel. Should an inspection panel not be able to recommend
sufficiency, the report and observations would be presented to the Council of the GDC
for consideration.

The inspection
7.

This report sets out the findings of an inspection of the Bachelor of Dental Surgery
(BDS) awarded by King’s College, London. The GDC publication Standards for
Education (version 1.0 November 2012) was used as a framework for the inspection.
This inspection forms part of a series of BDS/BChD inspections being undertaken by the
GDC 2012-14.

8.

The report contains the findings of the inspection panel across the two visits and with
consideration to supporting documentation prepared by the School to evidence how the
individual Requirements under the Standards for Education have been met. This
inspection forms part of a series BDS inspections being undertaken by the GDC 20122014

9.

The programme inspection took place on 12 and 13 December 2012. This involved a
series of meetings with programme staff involved in the management, delivery and
assessment of the programme and a selection of BDS students. The student sign-off

inspection took place from 3-6 June 2013 which involved attending elements of the final
examinations and the Final Examination Board meeting.

Overview of qualification
10. There are currently three entry points to the five-year BDS programme running at King’s:
the first offers no exemption, there is a one-year exemption for holders of a BSc in a
bioscience subject with a reviewed transcript and a two-year exemption for medical
(MBBS) graduates with a reviewed transcript. The total intake of students to the
programme, across the three entry points, is usually around 160 per year.
11. Much of the training takes place at Guy’s Tower close to London Bridge. Clinics utilised
here include Prosthodontics, Oral Surgery, Periodontology and Conservative Dentistry.
Paediatric experience is often gained at the Denmark Hill site in South London. The
Maurice Wohl Unit, previously located close to the Denmark Hill site, has been
subsumed by the Denmark Hill site. The unit still provides students with experience of
primary dental care. A new outreach location is to open in West Norwood, South London
in 2014 and the Outreach experience previously gained at Maurice Wohl will transfer to
this new location. The Norwood Hall site will have a similar community focus. Students
also have the opportunity to attend the DCP training facility at Portsmouth.
12. Other qualifications available at King’s are the Diploma in Dental Hygiene and Therapy,
the Diploma in Orthodontic Therapy. King’s are also delivering the Diploma in Dental
Nursing which is awarded by the National Examining Board for Dental Nurses (NEBDN).

Evaluation of qualification against the Standards for Education
13. As stated above, the Standards for Education were used as a framework for this
inspection. Consideration was given to the fact that the Standards for Education were
approved in late 2012 and that it may take time for providers to make amendments to
programmes to fully meet all of the Requirements under the Standards and to gather the
evidence to demonstrate that each Requirement is being met. The inspection panel
were fully aware of this and the findings of this report should be read with this in mind.
14. The provider was requested to undertake a self-evaluation of the programme against
the individual Requirements under the Standards for Education. This involved stating
whether each Requirement was met, part met or not met and to provide evidence in
support of their evaluation. The inspection panel examined this evidence, requested
further documentary evidence and gathered further evidence from discussions with staff
and students.
15. The inspection panel used the following descriptors to reach a decision on the extent to
which the BDS of King’s Dental School meets each Requirement:
A Requirement is met if:
“There is sufficient appropriate evidence derived from the inspection process. This
evidence provides the inspectors with broad confidence that the provider demonstrates the
requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students is supportive of
documentary evidence and the evidence is robust, consistent and not contradictory. There
may be minor deficiencies in the evidence supplied but these are likely to be
inconsequential.”
A Requirement is partly met if:

“Evidence derived from the inspection process is either incomplete or lacks detail and, as
such, fails to convince the inspection panel that the provider fully demonstrates the
requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students may not fully
support the evidence submitted or there may be contradictory information in the evidence
provided. There is, however, some evidence of compliance and it is likely that either (a) the
appropriate evidence can be supplied in a short time frame, or, (b) any deficiencies
identified can be addressed and evidenced in the annual monitoring process.”
A Requirement is not met if:
“The provider cannot provide evidence to demonstrate a requirement or the evidence
provided is not convincing. The information gathered at the inspection through meetings
with staff and students does not support the evidence provided or the evidence is
inconsistent and/or incompatible with other findings. The deficiencies identified are such as
to give rise to serious concern and will require an immediate action plan from the provider.
The consequences of not meeting a requirement in terms of the overall sufficiency of a
programme will depend upon the compliance of the provider across the range of
requirements and the possible implications for public protection.”

Standard 1 – Protecting patients
Providers must be aware of their duty to protect the public. Providers must ensure that
patient safety is paramount and care of patients is of an appropriate standard. Any risk
to the safety of patients and their care by students must be minimised
Requirements
Met
Partly Not
met
met
1. Students will provide patient care only when they have
demonstrated adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical

procedures, the student should be assessed as competent in
the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients
2.

Patients must be made aware that they are being treated by
students and give consent



3.

Students will only provide patient care in an environment
which is safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with
relevant legislation and requirements regarding patient care



4.

When providing patient care and services, students are to be
supervised appropriately according to the activity and the
student’s stage of development.



5.

Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained.
Clinical supervisors must have appropriate general or
specialist registration with a regulatory body



6.

Students and those involved in the delivery of education and
training must be encouraged to raise concerns if they identify
any risks to patient safety

7.

Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be
taken by the provider

8.

Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and
apply as required. The content and significance of the student
fitness to practise procedures must be conveyed to students
and aligned to GDC student fitness to practise guidance. Staff
involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar
with the GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance.







GDC comments
Requirement 1: Students will provide patient care only when they have demonstrated
adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical procedures, the student should be assessed
as competent in the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical environments
prior to treating patients (Requirement Met)
The students at King’s begin working clinically at an early stage in the programme. All the
student groups the inspectors met with felt this was an extremely positive aspect to the King’s
BDS programmes. The Applied Clinical Science Course at the very start of the first year of
study appears to offer a strong basis of preparation upon which to build and runs for 23 weeks,
mimicking real-life dentistry as much as is possible in the pre-clinical environment. In Year 1,
students will undertake non-irreversible procedures including taking patient medical histories
and providing oral health/dietary advice. They will also provide chairside assistance for more

senior dental students. Clinical experience develops and expands as students advance
through the later years of the programme. There is an understanding within the School that
commencing more complex clinical work at too early a stage can be very stressful for students.
As such, students in Year 2 of the programme will be undertaking, for example, simple ‘scale
and polish’ work. By the third year of the programme, their skills are advancing as they are
able to work clinically up to three days per week. The size of the School also allows scope for
students to experience differing methods of delivering dentistry.
As they progress, students are required to complete ‘hurdles’ prior to carrying out more
complex clinical work. These hurdle assessments must be passed in order for students to carry
out particular clinical procedures or to progress to the next year of study. The merging of the
Year 1 and Year 2 Curriculum Committees has enabled an effective exchange of information
as students progress through the programme. This has also been the case for the Year 4 and
5 Committees and this has brought about better communication regarding students’
development. The inspection panel were satisfied that students are, therefore, only
undertaking procedures on patients when they are fit to do so.
Requirement 2: Patients must be made aware that they are being treated by students
and give consent (Requirement Met)
Patients are provided with a leaflet when the first arrive at the hospital for treatment, which
explains the involvement of students. Leaflets are available in languages other than English.
When patients join a waiting list for treatment they also receive a letter which clearly states
their treatment may be carried out by undergraduate students. The inspectors noted there was
some variation between clinics as to how consent is given by patients. Not all clinics will
require written consent and, instead, rely on fully informed verbal consent. More complex or
irreversible treatments always require written consent. In some instances, patients are required
to sign and retain a copy of their treatment plan. Students told the inspection team that it was
sometimes difficult to obtain the use of a translator when dealing with non-English speaking
patients.
When students are working at the University of Portsmouth Dental Academy (UPDA) site,
patients are informed when they first make contact to enquire about treatment that students will
provide treatment.

Requirement 3: Students will only provide patient care in an environment which is safe
and appropriate. The provider must comply with relevant legislation and requirements
regarding patient care (Requirement Met)
The inspectors found that there are differing regulations across the various teaching and
clinical sites. Staff and students seemed keen to find methods of streamlining and rationalising
the various protocols and guidelines across locations.
Within the Dental Institute, issues relating to clinical governance are overseen by Management
Groups of both Foundation Trusts, which receive reports from Clinical Governance and Risk
Committees. The DMG is chaired by the General Manager of the Trust and representatives of
both the clinical staff and management team are members of the Group.
Both the Guy’s and King’s Trusts have been the subject of Care Quality Commission (CQC)
inspections which focus on patient care, however, these did not look specifically at the Dental
Institute. The inspectors were pleased to note that a CQC inspection of the UPDA had
concluded that all Standards were being met.

Requirement 4: When providing patient care and services, students are to be
supervised appropriately according to the activity and the student’s stage of
development. (Requirement Met)
On the whole, staff:student ratios were good or very good, although some ratios on certain
clinics were better than others. Students are often working in pairs with one of the pair acting
as a dental nurse. Generally, students also have dedicated dental nursing support as well as
working in pairs. This is a common situation in many Schools. Students the inspectors met with
reported that supervision levels were satisfactory. From the second year of study, each student
will keep the same personal tutor all of whom run an ‘open door’ policy. Students met by the
inspectors said they found tutors to be helpful and approachable at all times. The inspectors
noted that the integration of graduate entrants was well managed.
Requirement 5: Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained. Clinical
supervisors must have appropriate general or specialist registration with a regulatory
body (Requirement Met)
All clinical teachers must hold GDC registration and have at least three years’ experience.
There are clear HR processes all staff must complete (including Disclosure and Barring
Service (DBS) checks) before they are able to supervise students. All staff are encouraged to
undertake additional training via the King’s Learning Institute. There is a strong focus on career
development (including appraisals) and annual teaching days provide an additional source of
standardisation of teaching and assessment.
There are regular teacher education days which are planned well in advance to ensure that as
many members of staff are able to make themselves available to attend. Over 200 people
attended the most recent event. Attendance for these events is closely monitored but nonattendance is not viewed as being a particular issue since there is an overwhelming desire
among the staff body to develop and improve. Evidence gathered during the inspection
appeared to support this notion.
Requirement 6: Students and those involved in the delivery of education and training
must be encouraged to raise concerns if they identify any risks to patient safety
(Requirement Partly Met)
The inspectors were told that clinical incidents are rare which they felt was unusual –
especially given the size of the School. However, the evidence provided by the School did
appear to verify this. The School reinforces students’ obligation to raise concerns on an annual
basis and there is useful information included in student handbooks as well as a “Student
Charter” which aims to allow students to raise concerns as responsible adults. However, the
inspection team did not gain a sense that students had a strong awareness of the processes in
place if they were to identify patient safety issues. This is particularly pertinent given the early
introduction of clinical work.
The inspectors felt that the programme should include more comprehensive induction and
training for both staff and students on the importance of protecting patients through raising
concerns in their role in delivering patient care, including when they are no longer working or
studying at the School. The School should refer to the findings of the Report of the Mid
Staffordshire Foundation Trust Public Enquiry (Francis Report) when developing this training.

Requirement 7: Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be taken by
the provider (Requirement Met)
There is an electronic reporting system which must be used for clinical incidents. There are
Committees with direct responsibility for dealing with safety issues and the Management
Groups of both Foundation Trusts produce reports to the relevant Trust on trends relating to
clinical incidents. Similar systems are in place across the various clinical locations. There are
also systems in place for the recording and monitoring of ‘near misses’.

Requirement 8: Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and apply as
required. The content and significance of the student fitness to practise procedures
must be conveyed to students and aligned to GDC student fitness to practise guidance.
Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar with the GDC Student
Fitness to Practise Guidance (Requirement Met)
Students are required to read the GDC Student Fitness to Practise guidance and sign a form to
state that they have understood it. There are joint FtP procedures in place across all teaching
locations which the students sign up to. The inspectors were dismayed to hear that School
decisions relating to Fitness to Practise issues had been overruled by the University. The panel
felt strongly that the School should be given autonomy to make such decisions in future in
order to maintain patient safety and protect the general public.
During OSCE assessments in Year’s three to five, professionalism is tested and examiners
may mark down or fail a student who displays unprofessional behaviour.

Actions
Req.
Number

Actions

Due date

2

The School should take further steps to ensure that fully
informed written consent is obtained and recorded for
all patients who are treated by students on the
programme.

N/A

6

The School should strengthen the training and induction
for staff and students to emphasise the duty within their
respective roles to raise concerns about patient safety.

Update to be
provided through
the 2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

8

The School should have the autonomy to make
decisions relating to the fitness to practise of its
students.

N/A

Standard 2 – Quality evaluation and review of the programme
The provider must have in place effective policy and procedures for the monitoring and
review of the programme
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
9. The provider will have a framework in place that details how it
manages the quality of the programme which includes

making appropriate changes to ensure the curriculum
continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and
adapts to changing legislation and external guidance. There
must be a clear statement about where responsibility lies for
this function
10. The provider will have systems in place to quality assure



placements
11. Any problems identified through the operation of the quality

management framework must be addressed as soon as
possible
12. Should quality evaluation of the programme identify any



serious threats to the students achieving learning outcomes
through the programme, the GDC must be notified at the
earliest possible opportunity



13. Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external



quality assurance procedures

14. External examiners must be utilised and must be familiar with

the learning outcomes and their context. Providers should
follow QAA guidelines on external examining where
applicable
15. Providers must consider and, where appropriate, act upon





concerns raised or formal reports on the quality of education
and assessment
GDC comments
Requirement 9: The provider will have a framework in place that details how it manages
the quality of the programme which includes making appropriate changes to ensure the
curriculum continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and adapts to
changing legislation and external guidance. There must be a clear statement about
where responsibility lies for this function (Requirement Met)
There are clear quality management mechanisms in place. All evidence the inspection panel
gathered prior to and during the inspection supported this.
There is an Undergraduate Programmes Committee (UPC) and each module of the BDS
programme has a sub-committee which reports into this. The UPC is responsible for ensuring
the curriculum and assessments are monitored and developed. Staff met by the inspectors
reported that they are all able to input into Committees and other decision-making processes.

Staff are able to attend Committee meetings via video link if necessary and everyone is
encouraged to ‘have their say’.
The Staff:Student Liaison Committee (SSLC) appears to be working well for students. This
Committee meets once per term during Years 1 – 4 and once a month during the final year.
The inspectors were told that the students are very candid and frank when putting their views
across. The inspection team were pleased to hear from students they met with that the SSLC
performs a useful function for them. They told the panel that their concerns have been resolved
quickly using this mechanism.
Each year of study has its own Curriculum Committee. However, the Committees for Year 1
and 2 have recently been merged and the panel agreed that the exchange of information on
year groups this allows assists in maintaining a smooth transition into more complex clinical
work.
The panel noted that each clinical location has individual management groups responsible for
dealing with specific issues. Further to this, each location has differing rules and regulations
which can often cause minor problems as students need to remember what applies to each
different location. The inspectors were told that managing the interplay between the different
Trusts could often be difficult and they would like to see further work to reduce the impact of
this.
Requirement 10:The provider will have systems in place to quality assure placements
(Requirement Met)
Students were quick to praise their experiences at the Portsmouth site and the inspectors felt
that there are sound QA processes in place to manage their experiences despite the distance
from the main site in London. Staff from King’s attend the Portsmouth centre and staff rotate
between locations in order to achieve a consistent approach. Staff calibration is, therefore,
working well since everyone needs to be willing to be located at any of the sites in use. End-ofyear evaluation questionnaires and staff-student liaison meetings are also used as a means of
monitoring the success of students’ placements.
The panel were told that the School had not pursued the setting up of a more widely dispersed
Outreach structure due to concerns regarding quality assurance.
Requirement 11: Any problems identified through the operation of the quality
management framework must be addressed as soon as possible (Requirement Met)
There are sound structures in place which ensure there is a rapid response to issues raised.
Follow-up actions are required in order to ensure that any changes made are appropriate and
effective as well as ensuring that issues are ‘closed’. Each site used as part of the programme
has its own specific management group to deal with specific and relevant issues. Programme
review reports and associated recommendations pass to the College Education Committee
and the Dental Institute Education Committee where any actions required can be delegated to
the appropriate member of staff or team.
A popular method for students to raise issues is the use of comments books on clinic. Coupled
with this, the School’s ‘You Said, We Did’ initiative works well by informing students about
changes made as a result of their feedback via a dedicated page on the School website. The
panel felt, though, that more emphasis needs to be placed on explaining why certain changes
have not been made.

Requirement 12: Should quality evaluation of the programme identify any serious
threats to the students achieving learning outcomes through the programme, the GDC
must be notified at the earliest possible opportunity (Requirement Met)
The inspectors were assured that there have never been any issues, so far, which have
necessitated contacting the GDC. However, a clear process is in place whereby the Chair of
the Dental Institute Education Committee would, on behalf of the Head of School, contact the
GDC in relation to any emerging threats or serious emergencies. The inspectors agreed that
the quality framework in place meant that issues are picked up and dealt with long before the
need to contact the GDC would arise.
Requirement 13: Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external quality
assurance procedures (Requirement Met)
The College requires that programme reviews include external specialists and peers. A further
requirement of the College is for the Dental Institute Education Committee to include a member
of another KCL School and the King’s Learning Institute who has experience of College-wide
quality assurance structures. The most recent BDS review occurred in 2011 and, as part of the
process, staff and students were interviewed while progression statistics and external
examiner reports were scrutinised. Student representation is also in place for all Committees.
The Dental Institute has not been the subject of a targeted CQC inspection. Aside from the
involvement of external examiners, there is scope for further external review of the programme
which could be explored.

Requirement 14: External examiners must be utilised and must be familiar with the
learning outcomes and their context. Providers should follow Quality Assurance
Agency (QAA) guidelines on external examining where applicable (Requirement Met)
The involvement of external examiners in the BDS programme assessment mechanisms
follows QAA guidelines. This is a college requirement. All the external examiners are senior
academics appointed from UK dental schools and so have an understanding of the GDC
learning outcomes and their context.
The inspectors were able to meet with the external examiners during the final examinations.
They told the panel that there had been huge improvements to the running of the examinations
over the previous three or four years. Many of the suggestions they have made during their
tenure have been taken on board and implemented. The panel agreed with the external
examiners that the examinations run very smoothly given the difficult logistics for a school of
this size. It is also recognised that smaller schools are often able to implement changes more
quickly. The external examiners reported that they felt further work needed to be done in order
to calibrate the performance of individual examiners and, given what the inspectors saw onsite, they would support this view. The inspectors were also told that they are able to give a
great deal of feedback during Examination Board meetings and through external examiner
reports. The panel saw evidence of this when attending the Examination Board meeting and
were able to view reports together with responses to the reports and the actions taken as a
result.
Requirement 15: Providers must consider and, where appropriate, act upon concerns
raised or formal reports on the quality of education and assessment (Requirement Met)
The inspection panel saw strong evidence detailing how concerns are acted upon and many of

the comments under the Requirements for Standard 2 support this. External examiners submit
reports after each examination sitting and the School is required to provide a written response
to these.

Actions
Req.
Number
9

Actions
Methods of managing difficulties presented by the
multi-site set-up of the School should be monitored
and developed.

Due date
N/A

Standard 3– Student assessment
Assessment must be reliable and valid. The choice of assessment method must be
appropriate to demonstrate achievement of the GDC learning outcomes. Assessors
must be fit to perform the assessment task
Requirements
Met
Partly Not
met
met
16. To award the qualification, providers must be assured that
students have demonstrated attainment across the full range

of learning outcomes, at a level sufficient to indicate they are
safe to begin practice. This assurance should be underpinned
by a coherent approach to aggregation and triangulation, as
well as the principles of assessment referred to in these
standards
17. The provider will have in place management systems to plan,



monitor and record the assessment of students throughout
the programme against each of the learning outcomes
18. Assessment must involve a range of methods appropriate to

the learning outcomes and these should be in line with
current practice and routinely monitored, quality assured and
developed
19. Students will have exposure to an appropriate breadth of

patients/procedures and will undertake each activity relating
to patient care on sufficient occasions to enable them to
develop the skills and the level of competency to achieve the
relevant GDC learning outcomes







20. The provider should seek to improve student performance by

encouraging reflection and by providing feedback1.
21. Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills,

experience and training to undertake the task of assessment,
appropriate general or specialist registration with a regulatory
body
22. Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent

to which assessment processes are rigorous, set at the
correct standard, ensure equity of treatment for students and
have been fairly conducted







23. Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear

criteria. Standard setting must be employed for summative
assessments
24. Where appropriate, patient/peer/customer feedback



should contribute to the assessment process
25. Where possible, multiple samples of performance must

be taken to ensure the validity and reliability of the
assessment conclusion
1



Reflective practice should not be part of the assessment process in a way that risks effective student use

26. The standard expected of students in each area to be

assessed must be clear and students and staff involved
in assessment must be aware of this standard



GDC comments
Requirement 16: To award the qualification, providers must be assured that students
have demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes, at a level
sufficient to indicate they are safe to begin practice. This assurance should be
underpinned by a coherent approach to aggregation and triangulation, as well as the
principles of assessment referred to in these standards (Requirement Met)
Evidence provided to the inspectors in advance of the inspection included an extremely
detailed mapping of the programme against the GDC’s learning outcomes as published in The
First Five Years. This gave the panel a clear picture of where each outcome is covered in the
programme and the methods of assessment used to test attainment of each outcome. This
included both formative and summative assessments. The delivery strategy clearly showed
that a key aim of the programme and assessment methodology is to provide the evidence to
allow students to progress as well as to inform the student and the School about students’
performance against the outcomes expected of them. Please also refer to Requirement 18 for
information relating to assessments.
There are good opportunities for students to gain experience of working with other members of
the dental team during the programme and students the inspectors met were particularly keen
to praise their experiences at Portsmouth where they work alongside dental hygienists, dental
therapists and dental nurses. It is disappointing, then, that currently only 50% of the cohort is
getting this experience. The panel understand that Portsmouth is not a suitable location for
many of the student cohort given its distance from London. The new outreach location in West
Norwood, which will open soon, will provide a similar experience to Portsmouth and the
inspectors believe this new site will be a real asset to the programme.
The panel gained a very strong sense that patient care is compartmentalised and that
improvements need to be made to students’ experience of holistic care. More emphasis should
be placed on providing continuity of care.
The inspection team were pleased to note that the transition to delivering the learning
outcomes set out in Preparing for Practice is going well. This move was described as a
significant evolution rather than a revolution.

Requirement 17: The provider will have in place management systems to plan, monitor
and record the assessment of students throughout the programme against each of the
learning outcomes (Requirement Partly Met)
Student’s clinical work is monitored both formally and informally throughout the programme.
The inspectors had sight of students’ clinical portfolios during the inspection. A new, Electronic
Dental Record system for capturing clinical experience is currently being tested but is not
expected to roll out for student use for at least two years from the time of this inspection. This
system will also enable the recording of discussion points given as feedback following clinical
work. It is anticipated that the new electronic system will provide a deeper level of monitoring of
experience than has previously been possible. Please also refer to Requirement 25 for
information regarding clinical work.
The overall assessment strategy is designed to support learning by providing formative

feedback. There is a dedicated member of staff responsible for the assessment process. Part
of their role id to liaise with Year Co-ordinators. Assessments are overseen by the relevant
Progress Committee and this means that struggling students are identified and provided with
the necessary support.
Requirement 18: Assessment must involve a range of methods appropriate to the
learning outcomes and these should be in line with current practice and routinely
monitored, quality assured and developed (Requirement Met)
A wide range of accepted assessment methods are used throughout the programme in order
to assess the application of knowledge. These include, Multiple Choice Questions, Short
Answer Questions and essays. The final year assessments for the BDS programme comprise
two written papers (one of which is conducted online). In order to assess clinical aptitude,
students complete an objective structured clinical examination (OSCE), Case Presentations
and a Clinical Reasoning Examination. The inspection team attended the Case Presentation
and Clinical Reasoning Examinations only. Patients are required to attend the Case
Presentation examination. Although the inspectors could see why this might be useful, they did
not think their presence added a great deal to the process. Candidates provide examiners with
a high quality poster which includes digital photographs and radiographs. Some students the
inspectors saw, whose patients had not been able to attend on the day of the examination,
were in no way disadvantaged. Logistically, arranging for each patient to attend must add to
the burden of an already fairly stressful process for all involved.
The inspectors were impressed with the quality of the scenarios being used for the Clinical
Reasoning Examination as well as with the challenging level at which they had been set.
Grade descriptors used by the examiners (particularly for the case presentations) did not seem
to be very clear or helpful to the examiners in reaching a decision about the performance of a
candidate. The descriptors could be reviewed so they include more detailed and explicit
guidance.
Requirement 19: Students will have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and will undertake each activity relating to patient care on
sufficient occasions to enable them to develop the skills and the level of competency to
achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes (Requirement Met)
Students are given ‘quotas’ for clinical procedures and these must be attained in order for
students to be entered for end of year progress assessments although they do not actually
contribute towards assessments. The quotas themselves do not form an element of in-course
assessment.
Some students will be required to complete quotas after final examinations before they can be
signed off as able to register. Students met by the inspectors said that the quotas were not set
so that they are easy to meet. Despite the quotas being relatively ambitious, the panel were
pleased to note that students’ regularly exceeded them by some distance. The multi-site makeup of King’s provides students with access to very different types of patient during their course
of study. Expectations of what students should be able to achieve clinically are revisited and,
where needed, revised on an annual basis via Curriculum Committees in accordance with local
patient need. The panel were provided with sound assurance that the quota system combines
consideration of the standard of work undertaken with the numerical student experience.
Requirement 20: The provider should seek to improve student performance by
encouraging reflection and by providing feedback (Requirement Partly Met)

As noted under Requirement 17, the forthcoming electronic recording system will allow for the
recording of feedback on students’ clinical work. The inspectors noted, however, that while
there is scope for feedback from supervisors and patients to be recorded, there is no room for
the student to record their own comments and reflections on their performance. This needs to
be addressed.
Feedback is provided directly to students on their academic and practical achievements as well
as their overall professionalism. Feedback is given more emphasis when in relation to poor
performance as a means of encouraging reflection. Tutors have been provided with training in
effective feedback to help them engage more fully with the process and this has been well
attended. Awareness of the need for feedback appears to be growing. Group feedback
discussion sessions often take place at the conclusion of patient treatment sessions.
Requirement 21: Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills, experience and
training to undertake the task of assessment, appropriate general or specialist
registration with a regulatory body (Requirement Met)
Staff are encouraged to access training and development via the King’s Learning Institute.
These opportunities are available to all staff and this includes part-time members of the team.
It is a College requirement that academic staff have received training in teaching and the
College runs recognised training courses accordingly. All staff are subject to an annual
appraisal process in order to monitor their performance. There is a programme of teacher
education days which are well attended.

Requirement 22: Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent to which
assessment processes are rigorous, set at the correct standard, ensure equity of
treatment for students and have been fairly conducted (Requirement Met)
External examiners are appointed for a four-year term. Part of their role is to produce and
submit reports to which the School must respond. The external examiner reports are
considered, in the first instance, by the Head of School. Any issues raised which relate to
teaching will also be considered by the Programme Committee. The inspectors felt this
process had been clearly defined, described and evidenced.
Requirement 23: Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear criteria.
Standard setting must be employed for summative assessments ( Requirement Partly
Met)
The School’s ethos is that all assessments should be mapped to the relevant curriculum, and
be accurate, valid and feasible.
Marking descriptors used are generic College descriptors which the School acknowledge are
not necessarily the most appropriate descriptors for a dental programme. These are, therefore,
under review and there are plans to move towards a more descriptive and relevant marking
scheme in the near future. The inspectors were told this will make grading far more
meaningful.
When the inspection team spoke with the external examiners, they were told that standard
setting does not always take place despite the external examiners having commented on this
and requesting via external examiner reports that this should be incorporated into the
assessment process.

Requirement 24: Where appropriate, patient/peer/customer feedback should contribute
to the assessment process (Requirement Partly Met)
Patients are encouraged to make comments at any time, which will be recorded by members
of staff and the process for providing feedback is made clear to patients. As the School
develops the programme to align with Preparing for Practice, there are plans to formalise
patients’ role in the assessment process. For example, when students work in pairs, the
student who is assisting might play a role in obtaining feedback from the patient. The School
understand the need to ensure that any negative feedback is used in a positive manner.
A project looking at peer-DOPs (direct observations of procedures) has been put in place and it
is planned that this will develop over time. Methods of training are being developed to ensure
that the students are able to give an honest and useful assessment of their observations.
Students who spoke to the inspection team stated that they found peer assessment difficult as
they did not wish to appear as being superior to the colleagues. Often, the usefulness of peer
to peer feedback depended on the relationship between those giving and receiving feedback
and the confidence of the individuals involved. The students were clearly nervous of criticising
one another and the inspectors understood this but felt that this could be overcome. The use of
feedback requires further work to become a direct part of the student assessment process and
therefore this requirement is partly met.
Requirement 25: Where possible, multiple samples of performance must be taken to
ensure the validity and reliability of the assessment conclusion (Requirement Met)
Students are graded on each and every clinical procedure they undertake and the inspectors
were assured that the programme allows students to undertake the full range of clinical tasks
required of a newly qualified dental professional on multiple occasions.
Mid-session formative assessments allow the students to measure their performance against
end of year progression points which use a range of methods to assess breadth and depth of
knowledge. The mapping of the programme against the GDC’s learning outcomes clearly
demonstrated that each outcome is assessed at various points throughout the programme and
using a variety of assessment methods. Please refer to Requirement 18 for further information
relating to assessments.
Requirement 26: The standard expected of students in each area to be assessed must
be clear and students and staff involved in assessment must be aware of this standard
(Requirement Met)
All new staff must attend an induction programme in order to gain an understanding of
assessment standards. They are also encouraged to make use of the opportunities available
via the King’s Learning Institute. Departmental training days and teacher education days are
mandatory and cover these aspects of the programme.
Staff are encouraged to use the full range of available grades when assessing students’ work
in order to try and identify weaknesses at an earlier stage.
Assessment criteria are provided to students in the form of written guidance and are also
accessible via the virtual campus online. Students are given clear verbal guidance on an
annual basis regarding changes to assessment policies and procedures.

Actions
Req.
Number
17

Actions

Due date

The introduction of the electronic recording system
must take place at the earliest possible point to
ensure the experience of students is monitored
efficiently and effectively

Update to be
provided through
the 2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

18

Consideration should be given to the value of
having patients present during case
presentation examinations

N/A

20

The Electronic Dental Record must include scope for
students to record comments and reflection on their
own performance

Update to be
provided through
the 2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

23

Standard setting must be incorporated into the
assessment process as has been requested by the
external examiners

Update to be
provided through
the 2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

24

Methods of involving patient feedback in assessment
mechanisms must be investigated and developed

Update to be
provided through
the 2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

Standard 4 – Equality and diversity
The provider must comply with equal opportunities and discrimination legislation and
practice. They must also advocate this practice to students
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
27. Providers must adhere to current legislation and best practice

guidance relating to equality and diversity



28. Staff will receive training on equality and diversity,



development and appraisal mechanisms will include this
29. Providers will convey to students the importance of

compliance with equality and diversity law and principles both
during training and after they begin practice



GDC comments
Requirement 27: Providers must adhere to current legislation and best practice
guidance relating to equality and diversity (Requirement Met)
College-wide policies are in place relating to equality and diversity issues and staff and
students across locations are made aware of these and of associated legislation. The Dental
Institute itself has clear procedures set up to deal with any emerging issues or complaints.
Requirement 28: Staff will receive training on equality and diversity, development and
appraisal mechanisms will include this (Requirement Partly Met)
Staff across locations are encouraged to undertake formal training in equality and diversity
although this is not mandatory. The records provided showed that not everyone had done so.
The panel recognised that, in some cases, training will have been undertaken outside of the
dental school environment.
The Associateship of King’s College (AKC) qualification is offered to students alongside their
BDS studies. This covers ethics and is considered as being of great importance to the school
given its multicultural make-up. Staff are also able to undertake the AKC.
Requirement 29: Providers will convey to students the importance of compliance with
equality and diversity law and principles both during training and after they begin
practice (Requirement Met)
The student charter conveys the importance of equality and diversity issues to all students.
The School is required by the College to develop its own equality and diversity action plan and,
at the time of the inspection, this was under development. Students are required to sign a
contract at the commencement of their studies and this includes a section covering equality
and diversity issues. These issues are reinforced during the programme, particularly during the
Social and Behavioural Science course.

Actions
Req Number
28

Actions
Due date
Training on equality and diversity for all staff must be Update to be

developed and strengthened. This must be
compulsory for all staff involved in the delivery of the
programme

provided through
the 2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

Summary of Actions
Req Number

Actions for the provider

Observations

Due date

Response from Provider

(if applicable)

2

The School should take further steps to ensure
that fully informed written consent is obtained
and recorded for all patients who are treated by
students on the programme.

The Dental Institute is aware that not all
departments are in a position to get fully informed
written consent from patients who are treated by
students. This is currently provided for adult
patients treated at Guy’s Hospital. The current
paperwork will now be rolled out to all areas and
this will be made a requirement for clinical
governance from both NHS Foundation Trusts with
whom we work as well as at Portsmouth Dental
Academy and West Norwood Health and Leisure
Centre. All patients give verbal consent but it is
accepted this level of consent must be exceeded.
We thank the GDC for bringing this to our
attention.

N/A

6

The School should strengthen the training and
induction for staff and students to emphasise
the duty within their respective roles to raise
concerns about patient safety.

The issue of raising concerns about patient safety
is a national priority in healthcare at the present
time. The NHS Foundation Trusts and KCL will
now move this to the forefront of training and in
particular at induction of all new teachers. We
have never had any concern raised over this
matter, but appreciate it now has added
importance and greater cognisance will be taken of
this matter, in particular with new teachers.

Update to be
provided through
the 2014 GDC
Annual Monitoring
exercise

8

The School should have the autonomy to make
decisions relating to the fitness to practise of its
students.

The College’s published B5 Fitness for N/A
Registration and Practise Regulations (‘B5
Regulations’) apply to all programmes of study

across the College leading to a professional
qualification, which is registrable with a statutory
regulatory body, including the Bachelor of Dental
Surgery programme. These regulations invest
autonomy in Schools, including the Dental
Institute, so that they are able to investigate and
assess Fitness to Practise issues for themselves
and determine whether a case should be referred
to the College’s Director of Students and
Education for a Fitness to Practise hearing to be
convened. The GDC may wish to note that since
the GDC’s inspection of the BDS programme, the
B5 Regulations have been revised to more
explicitly acknowledge the role of Schools’ local
Fitness to Practise procedures in determining what
cases should be referred from the School to the
College. The Student Conduct and Appeals Office
has engaged with the Dental Institute and other
relevant Schools to ensure that School FtP
procedures are robust, fair and interface
consistently with the B5 Regulations.
The role of the College’s Fitness to Practise
Committee is to determine, on the basis of the
findings and evidence presented, whether students
referred to it are unfit for registration and practise
and to make any appropriate orders permissible
under the B5 Regulations. This process does not
consist of ‘overruling’ decisions made by Schools;
on the contrary it provides a structured forum in
which recommendations from the referring School
can be fully taken into account, alongside any
representations put forward by the student
concerned. Notably, the membership of the
Committee includes two senior members of the
given profession, who may or may not be

members of academic staff of the College. This
ensures that decision makers include those who
are personally familiar with the profession’s
specific
regulatory
requirements.
External
professionals are frequently used where this is
possible so that greater impartiality is embedded
within our Fitness to Practise procedures.
The current approach joins uniformity with flexibility
and ensures that students on professional
programmes are treated fairly. Heads of School
have the authority to suspend students from
clinical activities of their own volition where they
consider it appropriate under the B5 Regulations.
Where ameliorative steps cannot be identified or
where they have been exhausted, the College will
take all relevant circumstances into account and
make a final determination on a case-by-case
basis. Determining the ultimate outcome of Fitness
to Practise cases gives the College the opportunity
to ensure parity in how students are treated and is
mechanised to best serve principles of equity and
natural justice which meshes with the College’s
legal obligations and the expectations of the Office
of the Independent Adjudicator of Higher
Education (‘OIA’).
The College’s Fitness to Practise hearings are
clerked by experienced members of the centrallybased Student Conduct and Appeals Office who,
incidentally, have recently been observing fitness
to practise hearings across the regulatory sector
as part of a routine professional development
exercise. The College can assure the GDC that it
is uncompromising when it comes to patient safety
and protecting the public interest and all Fitness to
Practise cases are treated very seriously without

9

Methods of managing difficulties presented by
the multi-site set-up of the School should be
monitored and developed.

17

The introduction of the electronic recording
system must take place at the earliest possible
point to ensure the experience of students is
monitored efficiently and effectively.

18

Consideration should be given to the value
of having patients present during case
presentation examinations.

exception.
The on-going challenges of working with two
Foundation Trusts may be resolved by the merger
of the two NHS Foundation Trusts according to the
restructuring of the Academic Health Science
Centre. This will be a slow process, even if agreed
immediately. Agreement has been reached with
Senior Management for greater collaboration and
a sharing of working practice. The multi-site set-up
of the Dental Institute is both a strength and a
challenge. The challenges are being slowly
overcome and this statement from the GDC will
provide greater momentum for smoother working
for both staff and students across all our sites.
Communication overall is good, but we are not
complacent. All sites now have student (and staff)
liaison meetings, these will be monitored by the
Education Committee.
The Dental Institute is delighted this has been
noted by the visitors. The Salud system is currently
being rolled out on one site, but to overcome local
challenges, the Liverpool LiftUp system is being
purchased and introduced to all sites. This will take
1-2 years to implement, but is fully funded, and
staff to aid introduction are currently being
appointed. This is a very positive step forwards for
the Dental Institute.
This is a timely comment, which has been under
consideration for some time. It is now felt that with
good records, it is no longer a requirement to have
the patient attend for the assessment. This will be
proposed to the education committee for
introduction in June 2015. It is considered too soon
and the records system is not adequate for a start

N/A

Update to be
provided through
the 2014 GDC
Annual Monitoring
exercise

N/A

in June 2014, but this will be investigated.
The Salud electronic patient record system will be
investigated to offer reflective opportunity. The
Liverpool system does allow this and is likely to be
the system of choice to develop reflective
practitioners of our students. This will be in place in
all areas for 2015.

20

The Electronic Dental Record must include
scope for students to record comments and
reflection on their own performance

Update to be
provided through
the 2014 GDC
Annual Monitoring
exercise

23

Standard setting must be incorporated into the
assessment process as has been requested by
the external examiners

All current examinations are standard set.
Calibration of the examiners for the Clinical
Reasoning Examination in Finals has always been
problematic due to the size of the cohort. The
exact mechanism proposed by the visiting
examiner is not feasible, nor necessary in our
opinion. We have good psychometric data that the
exam is fair and reliable and that assessors
operate with a remarkable degree of internal
consistency and reliability. We would be happy to
present this data at any time to the GDC. We will
however continue to investigate improving the
reliability of our examination, even after the visiting
examiner has finished their term of service.

Update to be
provided through
the 2014 GDC
Annual Monitoring
exercise

24

Methods of involving patient feedback in
assessment mechanisms must be investigated
and developed.

Patient feedback is an important part of the
feedback process in appropriate assessments.
This is something we shall continue to investigate.
It is challenging as it lacks reliability, but is an
essential component of a future formative
assessment package for our students. This will
initially be developed for adult restorative care,
where patients are seen over a long-term.

Update to be
provided through
the 2014 GDC
Annual Monitoring
exercise

28

Training on equality and diversity for all staff
must be developed and strengthened. This must
be compulsory for all staff involved in the

We have begun enquiries at College level with a
view to introducing into the Dental Institute and the
wider College teaching environment an online

Update to be
provided through
the 2014 GDC

delivery of the programme.

method of delivering and assessing a course on
equality and diversity. If we do not find anything
appropriate we will develop one ourselves as we
agree this is an important area and we must
robustly ensure that all staff have regular and
appropriate training. We thank the GDC for
bringing this to our attention.

Annual Monitoring
exercise

Observations from the provider on the content of the report
We would like to say how much we valued this exercise and how positive the relationship was between the GDC, the
visitors, and King’s. It was a useful exercise to review the totality of our work, and have an external opinion as to the
efficacy and benefit of what we do. We did not believe we had any major issues (as agreed by the report), and are proud
of our curriculum and the work we do in training dentists at all levels, but it was useful for the GDC to point out issues
which we could then take to College to take forward in the best interests of students and, of course, patients.
Recommendation to the GDC
The inspectors recommend that this programme is sufficient for registration as a dentist with the General Dental Council

