Education Quality Assurance Inspection Report
Education
Provider/Awarding
Body
King’s College London

Outcome of Inspection

Programme/Award

Inspection Dates

Bachelor of Dental
Surgery

22 – 23 January 2019

Recommended that the BDS
continues to be sufficient for the
graduating cohort to register as
dentists

*Full details of the inspection process can be found in the annex*
Inspection summary
Remit and purpose of inspection:

Inspection referencing the Standards for
Education to determine approval of the
award for the purpose of registration with
the GDC as a dentist.
Risk based: focused on Requirements 2, 4,
6, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 15, 19 and 21

Learning Outcomes:

Preparing for Practice (Dentist)

Programme inspection date(s):

22 – 23 January 2019

Inspection panel:

Victoria Buller (Chair and Non-registrant
Member)
Andrew Buddle (Dentist Member)
Khalid Mushtaq (Dentist Member)
Shiv Pabary (Dentist Member)

GDC Staff:

Manjula Das (Head of Education Policy and
Quality Assurance)
Krutika Patel (Quality Assurance Officer)

The inspection undertaken at King’s College London (KCL) was risk-based, focusing on
specific areas of their Bachelor of Dental Surgery (BDS) programme. The GDC quality
assurance team and a panel of experienced education associates undertook an independent
evaluation of information available to determine the content of each inspection. The
information considered included annual monitoring returns, previous inspection reports
(including progress against actions), responses to wider recommendations in the GDC
Annual Review of Education, Fitness to Practise data and complaints received.
Following this assessment, it was decided that the inspection panel focus on Requirements
2, 4, 6, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 15, 19 and 21.
The BDS programme delivered by KCL is the largest in the UK, with approximately 150
students in each in of the five years. Given these high numbers, the panel was impressed
with range of clinical experience that each student carried out. In addition, the clinical
facilities and the nursing support available to all students in the dental hospital was
considered to be excellent. The panel also noted the training and support that KCL made
available to their staff, and the students spoken to provided positive feedback on the support
they received from staff as they progressed through the programme.
The panel learnt that KCL will be introducing a new curriculum for the 2020 academic year.
The education associates had concerns that there was a lack of planning concerning the
transitional arrangements – that is how students studying under the old curriculum would be
transitioned onto the new programme. Further information, including a risk register and
action log was subsequently provided to the panel, and the panel is now assured that

sufficient processes are in place to manage this transition and the GDC will be monitoring
these developments via its annual monitoring process.
Other areas that the education associates considered needed further development included
the use of LIFTUPP to monitor students’ clinical activity, which the panel considered had not
been progressed since the last inspection in 2014. Again, in relation to clinical activity, there
did not seem to be a regular audit of the data, which potentially could result in some
students’ exiting the programme without carrying out the necessary range of clinical
experience.
Students were very positive about the experience they gained at their outreach placements.
However, the panel was concerned that the experience received varied between the
students. In response to these concerns, the panel was informed that an Outreach Lead had
now been appointed, and one of their tasks would be to ensure that all students were
receiving an equitable clinical experience when in their placements.

Background and overview of Qualification
Annual intake

Programme duration
Format of programme

Number of providers delivering the
programme

The programme admits 128 students into
Year 1, 20 graduate-entry students into
Year 2 and 10 medically qualified students
into Year 3.
194 weeks over 5 years
Year 1: scientific knowledge, clinic
attendance, shadowing
Years 2-4: direct patient treatment, clinic
attendance, placements
Year 5 direct patient treatment, clinic
attendance, outreach, placements
King’s College London
Guy’s & St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust
King’s College Hospital NHS Foundation
Trust
University of Portsmouth

The panel wishes to thank the staff, students, and external stakeholders involved with the
Bachelor of Dental Surgery programme for their co-operation and assistance with the
inspection.

Outcome of relevant Requirements1
Standard One
1

Met

2

Met

3

Met

4

Met

5

Met

6

Met

7

Met

8

Met
Standard Two

9

Partly Met

10

Met

11

Met

12

Partly Met
Standard Three

13

Partly Met

14

Met

15

Met

16

Met

17

Met

18

Met

19

Partly Met

20

Met

21

Met

All Requirements within the Standards for Education are applicable for all programmes. Specific
Requirements will be examined through inspection activity through identification via risk analysis processes or
due to current thematic reviews.

1

Standard 1 – Protecting patients
Providers must be aware of their duty to protect the public. Providers must ensure that
patient safety is paramount and care of patients is of an appropriate standard. Any risk
to the safety of patients and their care by students must be minimised.
Requirement 1: Students must provide patient care only when they have demonstrated
adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical procedures, the student should be
assessed as competent in the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 2: Providers must have systems in place to inform patients that they may
be treated by students and the possible implications of this. Patient agreement to
treatment by a student must be obtained and recorded prior to treatment commencing.
(Requirement Met)
The School has processes in place to obtain appropriate, informed consent both in the Dental
Hospital at the outreach sites at Denmark Hill, Portsmouth Dental Academy and West
Norwood. The panel was presented with a selection of completed consent forms, which clearly
stated that dental students would be carrying out treatment.
The Dental Hospital’s Radiology Department has notices in the waiting room to advise patients
that they will be treated by students, which was observed by the panel when on a tour of the
clinical facilities.
When treating patients, all students wear coloured name badges denoting their student status
and introduce themselves at the beginning of each patient contact. The agreement to
treatment is also recorded in the patient notes, again at each stage of the patient’s treatment.
All patients are also handed leaflets regarding consent and treatment upon arrival.
A review of the consent process was recently carried out by the Associate Dean for
Undergraduate Clinical Education. The panel was informed there were no outcomes following
this exercise, as the current processes were deemed to be fit for purpose.
Requirement 3: Students must only provide patient care in an environment which is
safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with relevant legislation and
requirements regarding patient care, including equality and diversity, wherever
treatment takes place. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 4: When providing patient care and services, providers must ensure that
students are supervised appropriately according to the activity and the student’s stage
of development. (Requirement Met)
The inspection panel was tasked with looking specifically at staffing levels and whether this
has any impact on how this Requirement is met.
The School informed the panel that students carrying out any clinical activity are always
supervised by GDC registered staff. Senior and experienced staff are allocated to supervising
students in the latter years of the programme, who would be carrying out complex patient
treatments. New staff shadow senior colleagues until they are experienced enough to
supervise students independently.
In the Dental Hospital, the care planning consultant for each session is available and on call
for all floors to ensure all patients have access to specialist advice where appropriate.

Registered dental nurses are also present to support students and will raise concerns if they
consider the student to be practising unsafely.
As a contingency, scheduled clinics have allocated to them a ‘floating’ staff member who
would step in if supervision fell below the necessary levels required to ensure patient safety.
In outreach, ratios are typically 1:5 or 1:6, which students stated was sufficient and meant they
did not have to wait very long to have procedures signed off.
Requirement 5: Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained. This should
include training in equality and diversity legislation relevant for the role. Clinical
supervisors must have appropriate general or specialist registration with a UK
regulatory body. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 6: Providers must ensure that students and all those involved in the
delivery of education and training are aware of their obligation to raise concerns if they
identify any risks to patient safety and the need for candour when things go wrong.
Providers should publish policies so that it is clear to all parties how concerns should
be raised and how these concerns will be acted upon. Providers must support those
who do raise concerns and provide assurance that staff and students will not be
penalised for doing so. (Requirement Met)
The topic of raising concerns is delivered to students during the first week of the programme.
The subject of raising concerns is embedded within the curriculum and covered and assessed
at various times during the five years of study.
The panel was informed that the raising concerns policy for the Dental School was reviewed
following discussion at the Dental Education Committee in October 2018. The panel was given
a copy of this revised policy during the programme inspection and considered it to be
comprehensive and providing good examples of what constitutes a concern, and the
processes in place in order to raise concerns and protect patients at all times.
As well as this formalised pathway, students are able to raise concerns anonymously online
via their online student portal. Students also talked about the support and guidance available
from the Director of Student Welfare, who they would approach should they wish to seek
advice on any issues relating to patient safety. Students can train as peer supporters for the
younger years, and this is yet another avenue for support, if assistance is needed on whether
or not a situation or behaviour of a peer of member of staff is cause for concern.
Staff are provided with all the relevant policies when joining the School, with any significant
changes being communicated by email, and training sessions being organised if required. In
addition, the Dental Faculty organise drop in sessions, which allow clinical teachers to raise
any concerns with they may have with the Executive Dean and the Associate Dean for
Undergraduate Education.
Requirement 7: Systems must be in place to identify and record issues that may affect
patient safety. Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be taken by
the provider and where necessary the relevant regulatory body should be notified.
(Requirement Met)
Requirement 8: Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and apply as
required. The content and significance of the student fitness to practise procedures
must be conveyed to students and aligned to GDC Student Fitness to Practise
Guidance. Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar with the

GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance. Providers must also ensure that the GDC’s
Standard for the Dental Team are embedded within student training. (Requirement Met)
The inspection panel was tasked with looking specifically at the application of fitness to
practise processes.
The School has a ‘Student Fitness to Practise: Bachelor of Dental Surgery Faculty Policy and
Procedures’ which sets out:
• How will a fitness to practise issue be raised;
• What will happen when an issue is raised;
• What support can students’ access while an allegation is investigated;
• Outcome of the panel; and
• Notification of Outcome.
Following the programme inspection, the School provided further documentation explaining
when a concern becomes a student fitness to practise issue, and their plans in taking this
guidance forward. The panel was therefore assured that the policy was sufficient.

Standard 2 – Quality evaluation and review of the programme
The provider must have in place effective policy and procedures for the monitoring and
review of the programme.
Requirement 9: The provider must have a framework in place that details how it
manages the quality of the programme which includes making appropriate changes to
ensure the curriculum continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and adapts
to changing legislation and external guidance. There must be a clear statement about
where responsibility lies for this function. (Requirement Partly Met)
The panel was tasked with looking specifically at staffing levels and whether this has any
impact on how this Requirement is met.
Detailed information setting out the quality assurance framework was provided to the panel in
advance of the inspection. The responsibility of ensuring the curriculum remains fit for purpose
lies with the Quality Assurance and Quality Enhancement Committee (QAQE) which receives
information from various Curriculum and Assessment Committees (CAC). The CACs meet
once a term to review the curriculum and feedback from the Staff Student Liaison Committees
(SSLC). The QAQE Committee would also consider changes to the course. A selection of
minutes from these committees was provided to the panel, along with action plans and
deadlines from implementation. Examples of recent changes included amendments to lectures
in light of the changes to the infection control protocols and the inclusion of lectures on
professionalism. The panel was assured that should urgent changes need to be actioned in
the programme, staff are able to complete an online Course Change Request which would go
to the Dental Education Committee (DEC), who would discuss the request or delegate to the
relevant staff member/Committee as soon as possible.
In addition, there is a Programme Enhancement Plan in place which is a live document which
the School stated was developed with students, and in response to feedback received from
students, staff and external examiners. The plan is reviewed throughout the year by the Dental
Education Committee to ensure all noted issues are addressed.
The panel agreed that although clear lines of responsibility for change/amendment/monitoring
of the curriculum was in place, there was a concern about the lack of planning that had taken
place across the introduction of the new curriculum due to start in 2020. Subsequently an

action log and risk register were provided for the panel’s review. The panel considered that
timelines in place for implementation are ambitious and the School need to ensure there is
sufficient time allocated to test ideas/concepts and consult with all relevant staff and the
student body. The risk register did identify some key considerations, but again the education
associates were of the view that this document needed to be reviewed to ensure that all risks
were indeed captured and there was a cohesive action plan in place to address them.
The panel’s other concern was the fact that not all of the learning outcomes had been mapped
for the current programme and the School needed to ensure this had been completed prior to
the new curriculum being introduced.
The panel concluded that currently staffing was sufficient to support the framework and that
the current staff had the knowledge to understand when changes or decisions needed to be
considered by certain committees and when. However, there was no evidence provided to
demonstrate any succession planning had or was planned to take place and there was a
significant risk that should a key staff member leave, information or actions would not be
efficiently passed on to the remaining programme team.
Requirement 10: Any concerns identified through the Quality Management framework,
including internal and external reports relating to quality, must be addressed as soon
as possible and the GDC notified of serious threats to students achieving the learning
outcomes. The provider will have systems in place to quality assure placements.
(Requirement Met)
Requirement 11: Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external quality
assurance procedures. External quality assurance should include the use of external
examiners, who should be familiar with the GDC learning outcomes and their context
and QAA guidelines should be followed where applicable. Patient and/or customer
feedback must be collected and used to inform programme development. (Requirement
Met)
The inspection panel was tasked with looking specifically at how the School use student
feedback to inform the development of the programme, and whether this has any impact on
whether this Requirement is met.
The panel was provided with a range of evidence to demonstrate that the student voice of the
KCL BDS programme is taken seriously and changes are implemented where possible.
Evidence included a selection of minutes from the Progress Committee and SSLC, and BDS
Student Evaluation forms. The panel was able to see that issues raised were either addressed
or a clear explanation was provided as to why they were not possible. In relation to the
development of the BDS programme, examples of changes that have been actioned include
the teaching of certain topics and modules.
Requirement 12: The provider must have effective systems in place to quality assure
placements where students deliver treatment to ensure that patient care and student
assessment across all locations meets these Standards. The quality assurance systems
should include the regular collection of student and patient feedback relating to
placements. (Requirement Partly Met)
Students attend outreach in years 4 and 5 of the programme. There are two locations - West
Norwood and Portsmouth Dental Academy. Both centres have passed a Care Quality
Commission inspection and are all therefore deemed to be safe environments for patient
treatment.

At a School level, there are leads for each of the outreach locations, who produce an annual
report, including feedback from students which is then considered at the BDS Programme
Committee. The panel met with outreach staff who stated that there were named people at the
School that could be contacted should there be any difficulties. Each of the placements also
has to comply with its respective Trust policies, thereby adding another layer of checking to
make sure the placement remains fit for purpose.
Whilst the current outreach placements are beneficial in allowing students to treat a variety of
patients, the School has recognised that the experience received, differs amongst the cohort
and in a bid to have greater consistency have created a ‘Chair in Primary Care including
Outreach’ post, which is due to be taken up in June 2019. Part of the role will involve the
postholder ‘providing clinical and academic leadership to all outreach centres ensuring quality
assurance, standardisation of teaching, service delivery and compliance across all sites.’
In terms of feedback, students are able to feedback via anonymous online questionnaires and
formally through the SSLC. The panel noted that the placements have made changes to
patient allocation systems where possible, to ensure students get as much clinical experience
as they can.
The collection of patient feedback is less formalised, and although examples of feedback were
provided to the education associates, the information collected was not meaningful enough to
be effectively used to contribute to the development the programme.

Standard 3– Student assessment
Assessment must be reliable and valid. The choice of assessment method must be
appropriate to demonstrate achievement of the GDC learning outcomes. Assessors
must be fit to perform the assessment task.
Requirement 13: To award the qualification, providers must be assured that students
have demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes, and that they
are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner. Evidence must be provided that
demonstrates this assurance, which should be supported by a coherent approach to the
principles of assessment referred to in these standards. (Requirement Partly Met)
The inspection panel was tasked with looking specifically at the process of sign-up for final
examinations and access to a range and number of patients and whether this has any impact
on how this Requirement is met.
To ensure that students are fit to practise at safe beginner level, they must sit and pass the
summative assessment at the end of every year. Students are not able to compensate
between clinical and academic assessments. Attendance, punctuality and communication skills
are monitored in conjunction with assessment grades, to ensure students are maintaining the
level of professionalism required to practise as a dentist.
As they enter the latter years of the programme, students are informed what clinical activity
must be completed (to a passing standard), in order for them to be eligible to sit their final
examinations. Students are able to keep a track of their progress on-line, as well as through
meetings with their personal tutors. Student progress data is discussed at the Progress
Committee, and students identified as being in difficulty, are contacted and offered the
necessary support or remediation.

The panel was provided with a list of this criteria and was satisfied it was robust enough to
ensure students entered for finals, would have the requisite knowledge and skill in order to sit
these examinations.
The panel was also provided with progression data for the current final year cohort and was
impressed that given the high numbers of students, the pass rate was very high, and students
who had to re-take certain components always passed on their second attempt.
The panel do have concerns regarding the use of LIFTUPP in monitoring student progression.
The School acknowledge the software is not being used to its full capability but as of yet have
no agreed timeframes for the implementation of an enhanced version.
Blueprinting was another area of concern, in that not all the learning outcomes have been
formally blueprinted. The education associates reviewed the current course and assessments
against the learning outcomes and were assured that students in the current cohort will not exit
the programme without covering them all, but recommend the School review its blueprint so all
learning outcomes are formally delivered.
Requirement 14: The provider must have in place management systems to plan, monitor
and centrally record the assessment of students, including the monitoring of clinical
and/or technical experience, throughout the programme against each of the learning
outcomes. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 15: Students must have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and should undertake each activity relating to patient care on
sufficient occasions to enable them to develop the skills and the level of competency to
achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes. (Requirement Met)
The inspection panel was tasked with looking specifically at access to a range and number of
patients and whether this has any impact of how this Requirement is met.
As mentioned under Requirement 13, students must complete a number of specific clinical
procedures in order to be eligible to sit finals. The numbers or quotas are defined when
students enter their third year, and the School state that quotas will be reviewed in light of
patient availability across the programme.
The School explained that patient numbers are monitored by the leads in each of the subject
areas for each of the years. The panel was informed that the volume of patients has never
been an issue, its recruiting patients that require specific treatments that is sometimes a
difficulty. To ensure students are meetings their quotas, Student Liaison Officers will triage
patients requiring specific treatments to the more senior students so that they meet their signup criteria. Both students and staff informed the panel that system is working quite well and
none of the final year students are struggling to meet the requirements.
The panel was provided with a breakdown of the types of clinical activity the students were
carrying out and was satisfied the necessary range and number of patients were being treated.
The panel also noted the emphasis the School puts on team working and heard the students’
feedback on how valuable they found working with other members of the dental team as its
further developed their knowledge of when to refer and how dental care professionals can
support dentists in practise.
Requirement 16: Providers must demonstrate that assessments are fit for purpose and
deliver results which are valid and reliable. The methods of assessment used must be
appropriate to the learning outcomes, in line with current and best practice and be
routinely monitored, quality assured and developed. (Requirement Met)

Requirement 17: Assessment must utilise feedback collected from a variety of sources,
which should include other members of the dental team, peers, patients and/or
customers. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 18: The provider must support students to improve their performance by
providing regular feedback and by encouraging students to reflect on their practice.
(Requirement Met)
Requirement 19: Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills, experience and
training to undertake the task of assessment, including appropriate general or specialist
registration with a UK regulatory body. Examiners/ assessors should have received
training in equality and diversity relevant for their role. (Requirement Partly Met)
Under this Requirement, the inspection panel was tasked with looking specifically at staffing
levels and whether this has any impact on how this Requirement is met.
For all new staff there is a formalised induction process which they must participate in. New
examiners shadow experienced ones, until they feel confident to examine independently.
Those involved in marking written assessments are recruited according to their discipline. All
written assessments are double marked to ensure consistency of grading. Criteria for both
written and practical assessments is detailed and it is clear to the examiner what students are
being tested on and how marks should be allocated.
Those staff who are examining, are provided with assessment information in advance of the
exams. A briefing takes place on the day of the assessment along with a calibration exercise.
Examples of examiner briefings were provided to the panel which included information such as
exam objectives, what topics were going to be covered and information on the actual process
for example, the timings.
The panel concluded that staffing levels were sufficient and had no negative impact on the
assessment process. However, this Requirement is part met due to the lack of monitoring of
staff training, especially training related to equality and diversity. The School acknowledge this
is an area they struggle with due to the different employment contracts the programme staff
work under. All KCL staff must complete training on unconscious bias and equality and
diversity and a spreadsheet setting out which staff had completed this was presented to the
panel but was dated 2013. Trust employees must also complete training in equality and
diversity, but this is logged with their respective workplaces. The panel was of the view, that
the School should ensure that staff training is logged centrally, to ensure all staff have current
knowledge on the topic of equality and diversity.
Requirement 20: Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent to which
assessment processes are rigorous, set at the correct standard, ensure equity of
treatment for students and have been fairly conducted. The responsibilities of the
external examiners must be clearly documented. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 21: Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear criteria. The
standard expected of students in each area to be assessed must be clear and students
and staff involved in assessment must be aware of this standard. An appropriate
standard setting process must be employed for summative assessments. (Requirement
Met)
Standard setting is carried out for all summative assessments, using either the Ebel or Angoff
method. The panel was provided with clear evidence that standard setting was being employed
across all summative assessments and the criteria for this activity was clear and understood by

the staff involved. So that standard setting remains fit for purpose, the School carry out a
review at the end of the programme to ensure that attainments are comparable in terms of age,
gender and ethnicity.
The panel was able to view Course Handbooks for students and noted that they contained
information on the assessments related to particular modules and what criteria was expected
to be met, in order to achieve a pass mark.

Summary of Action
Req.
number
9

Action

Observations & response from Provider

Due date

The School must provide an update on its
implementation of the new curriculum in
2020. This must include an updated risk
register and action log setting out
timeframes.

Annual Monitoring
2020

9, 13

The School must provide evidence
demonstrating the current BDS programme
has been mapped to all the learning
outcomes set out in Preparing for Practise.
The School must provide evidence of
succession planning.

KCL is currently planning and developing a new BDS
curriculum for implementation in 2020-21. A steering
group and working groups are meeting regularly. The
initial project plan, with action log, and risk register has
been shared with the GDC and an update will be
provided in the Annual Report.
KCL provided the mapping document learning
outcomes and preparing for practice in advance of the
GDC visit
Succession planning is undertaken by the Faculty
within the wider KCL environ and business planning.
The Faculty actively engages with the NIHR ACF and
ACL process to ensure recruitment and succession at a
junior level together with recruitment at a more senior
level. In the last academic year, the Faculty has made
Professor/HCC appointments in oral pathology,
periodontology and restorative dentistry additional to
the existing staff base.
KCL is examining the most efficient and effective way of
collecting patient feedback that also provides individual
feedback to the student. The NHS trust collects patient
feedback but this is anonymised and not tied to the
student which is utilised to inform programme
development. Patient representation is actively sought
on the curriculum steering group for BDS 2020
Following the GDC visit, we have instigated an ongoing
review of the use of LiftUpp to inform our decision on
whether to proceed with the planned upgrade or move
to an alternative system. The CAFS (Clinical
Assessment and Feedback System) software is being

Annual Monitoring
2020

9

12

The School should continue developing a
process to collect patient feedback that
could be meaningfully used to contribute to
the development of the programme.

12

The School must provide timescales to
explain when the enhanced LIFTUPP
software will be implemented.

Annual Monitoring
2020

Annual Monitoring
2020

Annual Monitoring
2020

19

The School should look at ways in which it
can centrally record details of all
programme staff training, including equality
and diversity.

considered following a demonstration to the faculty and
business planning and procurement guidance is
currently ongoing. An update on the software used to
record clinical and reflective practice will be provided in
the Annual Report.
Equality and diversity training for staff is currently
carried out across KCL, the NHS Trust and HEE. KCL
is reviewing how this record of training could be
recorded within the faculty. In addition, the faculty is
launching in Jan 2020 a process of developmental peer
observation informed by current good practice and
supported by the Kings Academy. This process will be
collated by the Faculty quality assurance manager so
that any Quality improvement outcomes can be
supported and delivered

Annual Monitoring
2020

Observations from the provider on content of report
We were pleased to note that KCL met all the requirements for the Protecting Patients standard with adequate patient consent processes,
a safe & appropriate clinical environment and support from appropriately qualified and trained supervisors. We have revised our Raising
Concerns and Professionalism (Health & Conduct) policies to ensure that there are efficient mechanisms in place for raising concerns and
managing student health and conduct.
Continuing the development and implementation of the new BDS curriculum is a priority, whilst ensuring that the students on the old
curriculum are fully supported. Positive changes for the new curriculum are already being implemented within the old curriculum, such as a
move from fixed number quotas of clinical experience towards a more bespoke system, based on the individual student’s learning needs
and reflective practice. The learning outcomes of the current curriculum are already fully blueprinted and these will be mapped across. We
are working to a project plan to ensure the timeline is adhered to, and hold regular meetings across all years of the programme to enable
all stakeholders to be consulted and updated on the changes.
Concerns over the use of LiftUpp have been noted and KCL is aware that it is not being fully utilised across all areas of the BDS
programme. KCL is currently investigating moving to a different software provider, CAFS. Once this has been confirmed, timeframes for
trialling and implementing this, ensuring a successful transition from LiftUpp to the new system, will be agreed. This will include
communication with, and training of, students and staff. It is hoped that either an upgraded version of LiftUpp or the new system will allow
us to formalise patient feedback for each student, which can then also be used in the quality assurance of the BDS.
The governance of the BDS programme has been reviewed and revised to best support the new and outgoing cohorts, to provide effective
leadership for each year of the programme as well as across the whole programme.

Recommendations to the GDC
Education associates’ recommendation
Date of regular monitoring exercise

Qualification continues to be sufficient for holders to apply for
registration as a dentist with the General Dental Council
2020

Annex 1

Inspection purpose and process

1. As part of its duty to protect patients and promote high standards within the professions it
regulates, the General Dental Council (GDC) quality assures the education and training of
student dentists and dental care professionals (DCPs) at institutions whose qualifications
enable the holder to apply for registration with the GDC. It also quality assures new
qualifications where it is intended that the qualification will lead to registration. The aim of
this quality assurance activity is to ensure that institutions produce a new registrant who has
demonstrated, on graduation, that they have met the learning outcomes required for
registration with the GDC. This ensures that students who obtain a qualification leading to
registration are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner.
2. Inspections are a key element of the GDC’s quality assurance activity. They enable a
recommendation to be made to the Council of the GDC regarding the ‘sufficiency’ of the
programme for registration as a dentist and ‘approval’ of the programme for registration as a
dental care professional. The GDC’s powers are derived under Part II, Section 9 of the
Dentists Act 1984 (as amended).
3. The GDC document ‘Standards for Education’ 2nd edition1 is the framework used to
evaluate qualifications. There are 21 Requirements in three distinct Standards, against
which each qualification is assessed.
4. The education provider is requested to undertake a self-evaluation of the programme
against the individual Requirements under the Standards for Education. This involves stating
whether each Requirement is ‘met’, ‘partly met’ or ‘not met’ and to provide evidence in
support of their evaluation. The inspection panel examines this evidence, may request
further documentary evidence and gathers further evidence from discussions with staff and
students. The panel will reach a decision on each Requirement, using the following
descriptors:
A Requirement is met if:
“There is sufficient appropriate evidence derived from the inspection process. This evidence
provides the inspectors with broad confidence that the provider demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students is supportive of
documentary evidence and the evidence is robust, consistent and not contradictory. There
may be minor deficiencies in the evidence supplied but these are likely to be
inconsequential.”
A Requirement is partly met if:
“Evidence derived from the inspection process is either incomplete or lacks detail and, as
such, fails to convince the inspection panel that the provider fully demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students may not fully
support the evidence submitted or there may be contradictory information in the evidence
provided. There is, however, some evidence of compliance and it is likely that either (a) the
appropriate evidence can be supplied in a short time frame, or, (b) any deficiencies identified
can be addressed and evidenced in the annual monitoring process.”
A Requirement is not met if:

“The provider cannot provide evidence to demonstrate a Requirement or the evidence
provided is not convincing. The information gathered at the inspection through meetings with
staff and students does not support the evidence provided or the evidence is inconsistent
and/or incompatible with other findings. The deficiencies identified are such as to give rise to
serious concern and will require an immediate action plan from the provider. The
consequences of not meeting a Requirement in terms of the overall sufficiency of a
programme will depend upon the compliance of the provider across the range of
Requirements and the possible implications for public protection”
5. Inspection reports highlight areas of strength and draw attention to areas requiring
improvement and development, including actions that are required to be undertaken by the
provider. Where an action is needed for a Requirement to be met, the term ‘must’ is used to
describe the obligation on the provider to undertake this action. For these actions the
inspectors may stipulate a specific timescale by which the action must be completed or when
an update on progress must be provided. In their observations on the content of the report,
the provider should confirm the anticipated date by which these actions will be completed.
Where an action would improve how a Requirement is met, the term ‘should’ is used and for
these actions there will be no due date stipulated. Providers will be asked to report on the
progress in addressing the required actions through the annual monitoring process. Serious
concerns about a lack of progress may result in further inspections or other quality
assurance activity.
6. The QA team aims to send an initial draft of the inspection report to the provider within two
months of the conclusion of the inspection. The provider of the qualification has the
opportunity to provide factual corrections on the draft report. Following the production of the
final report the provider is asked to submit observations on, or objections to, the report and
the actions listed. Where the inspection panel have recommended that the programme is
sufficient for registration, the Council of the GDC have delegated responsibility to the GDC
Registrar to consider the recommendations of the panel. Should an inspection panel not be
able to recommend ‘sufficiency’ or ‘approval’, the report and observations would be
presented to the Council of the GDC for consideration.
7. The final version of the report and the provider’s observations are published on the GDC
website.

