INSPECTION REPORT
Education Provider /
Awarding Body:

Leeds Dental Institute (University of Leeds)

Programme / Award /
Qualification:

Bachelor in Dental Surgery (BChD)

Remit and Purpose:

Full inspection referencing the Standards for
Education to determine the continuing
sufficiency of the award for the purpose of
registration with the GDC as a dentist

Learning Outcomes:

Preparing for Practice (Dentist)

Programme Inspection Dates:

21 & 22 January 2013

Examination Inspection
Dates:

11, 12, 13 June 2013

Inspection Panel:

Gail Mortimer (Chair and Lay Member)
Steven Farmer (Dentist Member)
Raj Majithia (Dentist Member)
Ann Shearer (Dentist Member)

GDC Staff:

Luke Melia (Lead)
Ross Scales (Programme)
James Marshall (Examinations)

Outcome:

Recommended that the BChD remains sufficient
for registration as a dentist

Inspection summary
The inspection panel was impressed with the manner the School undertook to present its
documentation in advance of the inspection. Evidence to support each Requirement of the
Standards for Education was comprehensive and well referenced to illustrate exactly how
the School operated the various components of the programme.
Senior management, clinical tutors, and all of the staff and students who met with the
inspection panel demonstrated enthusiasm, professionalism and a commendable
commitment to the quality of the programme delivery. A strong team ethic was evident with
each member showing an awareness of his or her responsibility to maintain standards and
identify issues that might threaten the integrity of the qualification.
The inspectors found no major concerns, though there are some areas where it was felt that
the School’s excellent approach to obtaining and acting on feedback must be maintained.
Plans for a patient evaluation process across all clinical areas and the shared care of
patients between BChD and Hygiene and Therapy students were thought to be highly
beneficial initiatives that would enhance student development.
The quality management structure within the Institute and wider University were clear and
well established. The inspectors were confident that risks to patient safety or threats to the
substance of the course would be identified and dealt with expediently. There were
examples of issues being raised and considered, and the School designing and
implementing new processes to improve the targeted area.
Central recording of student assessment and clinical performance were exceptional with
detailed and reliable evidence recorded every week. The inspectors viewed this data in the
format of spreadsheet databases and felt the recordings demonstrated a strong level of
student clinical experience and a wide range of procedures and patients. The figures for
episodes of student activity were supported by clear assessment guidelines.
Dental team working was a strong element of the course. Leeds Dental Institute also trains
Hygienist/Therapists, Dental Technicians and Dental Nurses. The students are integrated
into lectures, share clinics and benefit from early interaction with each other.
The inspection panel was able to track student performance through the student sign-up
process and considered there to be a robust progression assessment strategy. The
inspectors were assured that upon graduation the students were fit to practise as safe
beginners.
The panel wishes to thank the staff, students, and other stakeholders involved with the
BChD programme for their co-operation and assistance with the inspection.

Inspection process and purpose of Inspection
1.

As part of its duty to protect patients and promote high standards within the professions
it regulates, the General Dental Council (GDC) quality assures the education and
training of student dentists and dental care professionals (DCPs) at institutions whose
qualifications enable the holder to apply for registration with the GDC and new
qualifications where it is intended that the qualification will lead to registration.

2.

The aim of this quality assurance activity is to ensure that these institutions produce a
new registrant who has demonstrated, on graduation, that he or she has met the

outcomes required for registration with the GDC. This is to ensure that students who
obtain a qualification leading to registration are fit to practise at the level of a safe
beginner.
3.

The inspection focuses on four Standards, with a total of 29 underlying Requirements.
These are contained in the document Standards for Education.

4.

The purpose of this inspection was to make a recommendation to the Council of the
GDC regarding the ‘sufficiency’ of the programme for registration as a dentist in the UK.
The GDC’s powers are derived under Part II, Section 9 of the Dentists Act 1984 (as
amended) to determine sufficiency of the programme.

5.

Inspection reports may highlight areas of strength and draw attention to areas requiring
improvement and development, including actions that are required to be undertaken by
the provider. Where an action is needed for a Requirement to be met, the term ‘must’ is
used to describe the obligation on the provider to undertake this action. For these
actions the inspectors may stipulate a specific timescale by which the action must be
completed or when an update on progress must be provided. In their observations on
the content of the report, the provider should confirm the anticipated date by which
these actions will be completed. Where an action would improve how a Requirement is
met, the term ‘should’ is used and for these actions there will be no due date stipulated.
Providers will be asked to report on the progress in addressing the required actions
through the annual monitoring process. Serious concerns about a lack of progress may
result in further inspections or other quality assurance activity.

6.

The provider of the qualification has the opportunity to provide factual corrections on the
draft report. Following the production of the final report the provider is asked to submit
observations on, or objections to, the report and the actions listed. Where the inspection
panel have recommended that the programme is sufficient for registration, the Council
of the GDC have delegated responsibility to the GDC Registrar to consider the
recommendations of the panel. Should an inspection panel not be able to recommend
sufficiency, the report and observations would be presented to the Council of the GDC
for consideration.

The Inspection
7.

This report sets out the findings of an inspection of the Bachelor of Dental Surgery
(BChD) awarded by Leeds Dental Institute. The GDC publication Standards for
Education (version 1.0 November 2012) was used as a framework for the inspection.
This inspection forms part of a series of BDS/BChD inspections being undertaken by the
GDC 2012-2014.

8.

The inspection was comprised of two visits. The first, referred to as the programme
inspection, was carried out on 21 and 22 January 2013. This involved a series of
meetings with programme staff involved in the management, delivery and assessment
of the programme and a selection of BChD students. The second visit took place
between 11 and 13 June and is referred to as the examination/student sign-off
inspection. The lead quality assurance officer from the GDC also attended the student
sign-up meeting for final examinations in April, and two inspectors and the lead quality
assurance officer attended the Examination Board in June.

9.

The report contains the findings of the inspection panel across the two visits and with
consideration to supporting documentation prepared by the School to evidence how the
individual Requirements under the Standards for Education have been met.

Overview of Qualification
10. The BChD programme sits within the Faculty of Medicine and Health at Leeds
University. The programme has an annual intake of 96 students. The duration of the
programme is 182 weeks over five years of study and training. Leeds University also
offers a Graduate Diploma in Dental Hygiene and Dental Therapy, a Diploma in Dental
Technology and an Advanced Apprenticeship in Health (Dental Nursing). The latter
being a joint venture between Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust and Bradford
College.
11. In 2011, Leeds Dental Institute undertook a rigorous design and consultation process to
create an undergraduate integrated Masters and Bachelors programme in Dentistry
(MChD/BChD, BSc Oral Science). The proposed revisions to the programme of study
were submitted to the GDC and noted by the Education Committee in 2011 (the powers
of the Education Committee were delegated to the GDC Chief Executive and Registrar
at the end of 2011). This scope of this inspection was to assess the sufficiency of the
undergraduate BChD, which is the registrable portion of the qualification, for the
purpose of registration as a dentist.
12. The new programme is designed to meet the learning outcomes in the GDC’s new
curriculum document, Preparing for Practice (published in late 2011). Some students
remain enrolled from a time when the learning outcomes were mapped to the previous
GDC curriculum document, The First Five Years. Senior management demonstrated
that the current mapping for the programme shows assessment and coverage of the full
range of learning outcomes from both documents.

Evaluation of Qualification against the Standards for Education
13. As stated above, the Standards for Education were used as a framework for this
inspection. Consideration was given to the fact that the Standards for Education were
approved in late 2012 and that it may take time for providers to make amendments to
programmes to fully meet all of the Requirements under the Standards and to gather the
evidence to demonstrate that each Requirement is being met. The inspection panel
were fully aware of this and the findings of this report should be read with this in mind.
14. The provider was requested to undertake a self-evaluation of the programme against
the individual Requirements under the Standards for Education. This involved stating
whether each Requirement is met, partly met or not met and to provide evidence in
support of their evaluation. The inspection panel examined this evidence, requested
further documentary evidence and gathered further evidence from discussions with staff
and students.
15. The inspection panel used the following descriptors to reach a decision on the extent to
which the BChD programme at the Leeds Dental Institute meets each Requirement:
A Requirement is met if:
“There is sufficient appropriate evidence derived from the inspection process. This
evidence provides the inspectors with broad confidence that the provider demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students is supportive
of documentary evidence and the evidence is robust, consistent and not contradictory.

There may be minor deficiencies in the evidence supplied but these are likely to be
inconsequential.”
A Requirement is partly met if:
“Evidence derived from the inspection process is either incomplete or lacks detail and, as
such, fails to convince the inspection panel that the provider fully demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students may not fully
support the evidence submitted or there may be contradictory information in the evidence
provided. There is, however, some evidence of compliance and it is likely that either (a) the
appropriate evidence can be supplied in a short time frame, or, (b) any deficiencies
identified can be addressed and evidenced in the annual monitoring process.”
A Requirement is not met if:
“The provider cannot provide evidence to demonstrate a Requirement or the evidence
provided is not convincing. The information gathered at the inspection through meetings
with staff and students does not support the evidence provided or the evidence is
inconsistent and/or incompatible with other findings. The deficiencies identified are such as
to give rise to serious concern and will require an immediate action plan from the provider.
The consequences of not meeting a Requirement in terms of the overall sufficiency of a
programme will depend upon the compliance of the provider across the range of
Requirements and the possible implications for public protection.”

Standard 1 – Protecting patients
Providers must be aware of their duty to protect the public. Providers must ensure that
patient safety is paramount and care of patients is of an appropriate standard. Any risk
to the safety of patients and their care by students must be minimised
Requirements
Met
Partly Not
met
met
1. Students will provide patient care only when they have
demonstrated adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical
procedures, the student should be assessed as competent in
the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patient



2. Patients must be made aware that they are being treated by
students and give consent



3. Students will only provide patient care in an environment
which is safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with
relevant legislation and requirements regarding patient care



4. When providing patient care and services, students are to be
supervised appropriately according to the activity and the
student’s stage of development



5. Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained.
Clinical supervisors must have appropriate general or
specialist registration with a regulatory body



6. Students and those involved in the delivery of education and
training must be encouraged to raise concerns if they identify
any risks to patient safety



7. Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be
taken by the provider



8. Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and
apply as required. The content and significance of the student
fitness to practise procedures must be conveyed to students
and aligned to GDC student fitness to practise guidance. Staff
involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar
with the GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance



GDC comments
Requirement 1: Students will provide patient care only when they have demonstrated
adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical procedures, the student should be assessed
as competent in the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical environments
prior to treating patient (Requirement Met)
The inspection panel saw evidence that students had to complete a comprehensive round of
pre-clinical assessments before treating patients. Year 1 includes tutor observed sessions in
basic cross infection control, basic supra-gingival scaling technique, and local analgesia
techniques. This is followed up by a Clinical Skills A module in Year 2 with summative and
progression assessments including basic preparation and restoration tests (with plastic

restorative materials). The knowledge and skills of the two earlier years are built on in Year 3
with a Clinical Skills B module. Students are tested on several areas including crown
preparation, endodontic treatments, partial denture design and basic extractions. The
inspectors concluded that the early years of study prepared the students well for the more
expansive clinical environments experienced in Years 4 and 5.
There was a clear element of continuous assessment of student performance evident in
student logbooks. Tutor feedback and examination results were also recorded and regularly
monitored by a Clinical Progress Committee. The Clinical Progress Committee meets on a
termly basis for Years 3 to 5 with additional meetings for other year groups, and as necessary
for individual student cases. The remit of the committee is to identify any students that may
require further training or candidates whose conduct and attendance was unsatisfactory. The
latter could be referred to a Progress Committee, a sub-committee of the Dental Institute’s
Board of Examiners, for appropriate actions to be agreed. The inspection panel reviewed
minutes for both committees and could see a clear record of discussion and decisions.
A number of students informed the inspectors that they were eager to commence clinical work
and had chosen Leeds specifically for the early interaction with patients. This commences in
the last term of Year 1 with basic periodontal procedures and charting. The students felt they
benefited from the experience as it allowed them to put skills straight into practice, building
their confidence and honing their communication skills.
Requirement 2: Patients must be made aware that they are being treated by students
and give consent (Requirement Met)
Patients register for treatment with students via the Leeds Dental Institute’s website
(http://medhealth.leeds.ac.uk/info/1260/treatment/153/volunteer_for_student_treatment). The
webpage states clearly that dental students would be performing treatment should this be
deemed appropriate after a screening process has been taken place. Volunteers undergo a
15-minute assessment (longer if an X-ray picture is required) to determine whether their dental
needs match the treatments available on the programme. A screening process is also
employed when patients have been referred from general practice. Informed consent is then
reinforced through patient contract forms in every clinical centre, and information leaflets.
The students displayed a strong understanding of the importance of consent and clear
communication with patients about all aspects of their treatment. The inspectors were informed
that supervisors included consent procedures within their remit for overseeing patient
treatment.

Requirement 3: Students will only provide patient care in an environment which is safe
and appropriate. The provider must comply with relevant legislation and requirements
regarding patient care (Requirement Met)
The inspection panel was satisfied that the clinical environment was safe and relevant
legislation was met. There was an incident log for Leeds Dental Institute (LDI) that was
reviewed and audited with actions taken. A LDI Health and Safety Forum is held bi-monthly
with the minutes showing a strong discussion on whether health and safety policy and
procedures remained appropriate and explored how aspects could be improved in the future.
There was evidence of good links with outreach placements, which were seen to be subject to
the health and safety policies of their relevant NHS board. Students receive full inductions
before providing treatment at clinical sites, including details of local health and safety policy
and procedures. The inspectors held teleconferences with Outreach facility staff and felt the

principles of maintaining patient safety at all times were well embedded within the placements
and fully understood by the staff working in them.

Requirement 4: When providing patient care and services, students are to be
supervised appropriately according to the activity and the student’s stage of
development (Requirement Met)
The inspectors considered the level of supervision within the programme to be appropriate and
well gauged to each stage of student development. There was a staff student ratio of one to
eight in the Leeds Dental Hospital; one to seven in the Beeston and Bradford outreach
placements, and one to six in the Hull outreach placement. The expectations of staff/student
supervision were clearly defined in the Schools’ Restorative Dentistry Clinical Handbook.
Staff and students informed the inspectors that supervision ratios were well maintained. Both
indicated that the programme benefited from a system of consultant cover, whereby a senior
member of clinical staff was always on hand to offer advice on any aspect of treatment.
Requirement 5: Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained. Clinical
supervisors must have appropriate general or specialist registration with a regulatory
body (Requirement Met)
The inspection panel was provided with a list of teaching staff involved in the programme,
which included details of qualifications and registration with the GDC or other regulatory body.
The information showed tutors were appropriately qualified to work in the capacity of
supervisors on the programme.
The School has an excellent induction outline for new staff with two weeks mentoring and
enrolment on to the University of Leeds Teaching Award 2 (ULTA2). There was evidence of
regular training days for all staff including outreach tutors.
Requirement 6: Students and those involved in the delivery of education and training
must be encouraged to raise concerns if they identify any risks to patient safety
(Requirement Met)
The inspection panel found there to be a professional ethos throughout the running of the
programme. From the course induction, students are encouraged to raise concerns during
their training and prompted of the nature of the commitments that registration with the GDC
will involve.
Staff and students displayed a strong understanding of the importance of patient safety and
their personal responsibility to raise concerns should they identify them. On an annual basis,
students sign a LDI Code of Professional Conduct and Fitness to Practise for Dental Students,
which incorporates duty of care, and duty to report any risk to patient safety. The inspectors
felt there was value in this formal re-emphasising of this code of conduct.
The School supplied details of a recent example where a student cohort had brought a
potential patient safety incident to the attention of senior management. Details of the
circumstance shall not be outlined in this report, but the inspectors were afforded the
opportunity to review the incident paperwork in its entirety. It was felt that the maturity
demonstrated by the students and the sensible management of the situation by senior staff
was highly commendable.

Requirement 7: Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be taken by
the provider (Requirement Met)
The inspection panel was confident that appropriate action would be taken by the School
should a patient safety issue arise. Staff and students offered assurances that should they
come forward with a patient safety issue, senior management could be trusted to take all
necessary action.
The inspectors saw evidence of a clearly defined process for matters of student ill health or
poor conduct to be reported to a designated officer who was trained to manage situations with
appropriate sensitivity. There were several levels of escalation for incidents of a more serious
nature with guidance for when different members of management should be informed and/or
university protocols were to be invoked. The system works in tandem with NHS policies for
wider hospital remits.
The inspection panel saw evidence that incident reporting was in operation in all clinical sites,
which included the logging of near misses. The recording is hospital wide though there was
enough detail to identify where students had been involved. All issues and any identified trends
are discussed at the Healthy and Safety Committee. It was also felt that a School protocol for
raising concerns, specific to dental staff and students, would be beneficial. The system could
be aligned with Trust procedures, outreach placements, and regularly emphasised to the
students across programme delivery.
Requirement 8: Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and apply as
required. The content and significance of the student fitness to practise procedures
must be conveyed to students and aligned to GDC student fitness to practise guidance.
Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar with the GDC Student
Fitness to Practise Guidance (Requirement Met)
The inspection panel reviewed the School’s fitness to practise policy which is aligned to the
GDC Student Fitness to Practise guidance. It falls under the Health and Conduct Committee to
consider individual cases where health, behaviour, or conduct has given rise to serious
concerns about a candidate. Since 2010, four cases have gone before the committee with
anonymised details made available to the inspectors. Administration and protocol for
deliberations were considered appropriate and comparable to other institutions.
Actions
Req.
Actions for the provider
Number
7
The School should develop a School protocol for raising concerns
specific to dental staff and students. The document should be
aligned with Trust providers, outreach placements and regularly
emphasised to the students across programme delivery.

Due Date
(if applicable)
Update to be
provided
through the
2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

Standard 2 – Quality evaluation and review of the programme
The provider must have in place effective policy and procedures for the monitoring and
review of the programme
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
9. The provider will have a framework in place that details how it
manages the quality of the programme which includes
making appropriate changes to ensure the curriculum
continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and
adapts to changing legislation and external guidance. There
must be a clear statement about where responsibility lies for
this function
10. The provider will have systems in place to quality assure
placements
11. Any problems identified through the operation of the quality
management framework must be addressed as soon as
possible
12. Should quality evaluation of the programme identify any
serious threats to the students achieving learning outcomes
through the programme, the GDC must be notified at the
earliest possible opportunity









13. Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external
quality assurance procedures



14. External examiners must be utilised and must be familiar with
the learning outcomes and their context. Providers should
follow QAA guidelines on external examining where
applicable



15. Providers must consider and, where appropriate, act upon
concerns raised or formal reports on the quality of education
and assessment



GDC comments
Requirement 9: The provider will have a framework in place that details how it manages
the quality of the programme which includes making appropriate changes to ensure the
curriculum continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and adapts to
changing legislation and external guidance. There must be a clear statement about
where responsibility lies for this function (Requirement Met)
The pre-inspection documentation states that the Director of Student Education has the
responsibility to coordinate the overall processes of School evaluation, review and reflection
and keep procedures in accordance with University policy. The Director delegates different
areas of responsibility to various committees, each with a specific remit. The School and
Faculty committee systems were explained to the inspectors in detail and evidence of their
working was explored in minutes and scheduled discussion.

It was seen that learning and teaching issues were considered by the Institute Taught Student
Education Committee (ITSEC). The terms of reference for this forum are clear with robust
underpinning policy. The committee has student representation and reports directly to the
Faculty of Medicine and Health's Taught Student Education Committee (FTSEC). The FTSEC
has the overall responsibly for quality assuring the LDI.
Graduate and postgraduate framework committees and a staff/student forum were found to be
in operation. Students informed the inspectors that they were actively encouraged to get
involved in the management structure of the School and felt their views were listened to by
senior staff.
It was explained to the inspectors how module reviews are undertaken on an annual basis.
These incorporate feedback from students, staff, external examiners and other appropriate
stakeholders in addition to analysis of student performance data. An annual programme review
is also conducted, which considers statistical information on student progress; the views of
students from all levels of the programme; the views of the module teaching staff; the views of
the external examiners and the collated information gathered from the individual module
reviews. The inspectors were able to track actions identified for areas of improvement through
a consultative stage and into implementation.
The inspection panel was informed that plans are underway for the mapping of the GDC
learning outcomes to be included in all standard module and programme review documents.
The aim is for this to allow regular, audited monitoring of mapping within the School and
Faculty review systems. The inspectors considered this to be a useful tool to simplify the
process for future mapping exercises.
An Annual Health Check of the programme occurs every year at Faculty level, which has a
focus to maintain academic standards, the quality of the student experience and how the
management systems are operating in practice. The School is also subject to a Student
Academic Experience review, a five yearly opportunity for a strategic overview of the entire
learning and teaching activity.
The inspection panel felt that the operating system was robust, well-coordinated and benefited
from a dynamic management team and strong links with the University and NHS.
Requirement 10: The provider will have systems in place to quality assure placements
(Requirement Met)
The inspection panel was assured that there was adequate quality assurance for placements.
Students visit three outreach placements – Bradford, Beeston and Hull – during the second
and third terms in Year 4 and the first term in Year 5. The aim is for students to attend one day
a week with a change of location each term.
Outreach placements are a relatively new feature of the programme and benefit from close ties
with the LDI. Experienced teachers work at each of the sites and offer continuity with the safety
procedures, equipment and assessment practices that are in operation in the Dental School.
The inspectors spoke to supervisors at every location and were impressed with their dedication
to providing a wide range of clinical exposure to the students while always maintaining patient
safety. These clinical tutors attend staff training days and are asked to share their views and
experience with the wider teaching team. The inspectors felt that the benefits of outreach were
enhanced by the School maintaining such strong links with the staff at the sites.
The School centrally records and monitors staff and student feedback from the placements.
This year, programme managers have visited the clinics to offer advice and guidance to clinical

tutors and nurses. The School will be making these visits a feature of an annual monitoring
system for placements. The inspectors felt that an outreach coordinator or the development of
an outreach liaison committee may also be of benefit as quality assurance of placements
becomes more refined.
Requirement 11: Any problems identified through the operation of the quality
management framework must be addressed as soon as possible (Requirement Met)
The inspection panel was confident that any problems identified through the operation of the
quality management framework, outlined in the narrative for Requirement 9, would be
addressed appropriately and at the earliest opportunity. There was clear evidence of issues
being raised, investigated and resolved within the documentation reviewed by the panel during
the inspection.
Requirement 12: Should quality evaluation of the programme identify any serious
threats to the students achieving learning outcomes through the programme, the GDC
must be notified at the earliest possible opportunity (Requirement Met)
The inspection panel was assured that the School closely monitored threats to the programme.
The inspectors agreed that none of the issues that had arisen were serious enough to warrant
referral to the GDC and were confident that the regulator would be informed should a serious
threat be identified.
Requirement 13: Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external quality
assurance procedures (Requirement Met)
As outlined in Requirement 9 and 11, the inspection panel found there to be several internal
quality assurance methods in place with relevant policies and procedures to underpin them.
LDI is also subject to yearly Faculty monitoring and five yearly reviews. The inspectors felt
there was an excellent attitude to feedback within the School, both in seeking it and in acting
on it.
External quality assurance comes from the Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education
(QAA) and the employment of external examiners. The quality assurance from external
examiners is discussed in Requirements 14 and 21.
Requirement 14: External examiners must be utilised and must be familiar with the
learning outcomes and their context. Providers should follow QAA guidelines on
external examining where applicable (Requirement Met)
External examiners are utilised and are familiar with learning outcomes and their context. QAA
guidance was followed throughout. The team of three external examiners operated as
overseers of the examinations, the examination process and all three were present for the final
ratification of the assessment outcomes at the Examination Board.
There was a guidance briefing in advance of the final examinations for all examiners with
external examiners also being provided with a Handbook for External Examiners that includes
details of the University Ordinances and Regulations. In addition, external examiners received
information on the programme of study and a copy of the Code of Practice on Assessment in
advance. The inspectors felt that they had observed an example of notable practice in this

area.
Requirement 15: Providers must consider and, where appropriate, act upon concerns
raised or formal reports on the quality of education and assessment (Requirement Met)
The inspection panel was confident that the School will act on concerns raised or formal
reports on the quality of the education and assessment in the programme. The inspectors
reviewed several examples of the School acting on both internal and external feedback.
External examiner reports were particularly well employed as a tool for assessing and
implementing areas for improvement within the programme.
Actions
Req.
Actions for the provider
Number
9
The School should continue with its plan for the mapping of GDC
learning outcomes to be included in all standard module and
programme review documents.

10

i. The School should ensure that it carries out its plan to undertake
yearly visits to outreach placements.
ii. The School should consider the benefits of creating an outreach
coordinator and/or an outreach liaison committee to have overall
responsibility for quality assuring placements

Due Date
(if applicable)
Update to be
provided
through the
2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise
Update to be
provided
through the
2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

Standard 3– Student assessment
Assessment must be reliable and valid. The choice of assessment method must be
appropriate to demonstrate achievement of the GDC learning outcomes. Assessors
must be fit to perform the assessment task
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
16. To award the qualification, providers must be assured that
students have demonstrated attainment across the full range
of learning outcomes, at a level sufficient to indicate they are
safe to begin practice. This assurance should be underpinned
by a coherent approach to aggregation and triangulation, as
well as the principles of assessment referred to in these
standards



17. The provider will have in place management systems to plan,
monitor and record the assessment of students throughout
the programme against each of the learning outcomes



18. Assessment must involve a range of methods appropriate to
the learning outcomes and these should be in line with
current practice and routinely monitored, quality assured and
developed



19. Students will have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and will undertake each activity relating
to patient care on sufficient occasions to enable them to
develop the skills and the level of competency to achieve the
relevant GDC learning outcomes
20. The provider should seek to improve student performance by
encouraging reflection and by providing feedback 1
21. Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills,
experience and training to undertake the task of assessment,
appropriate general or specialist registration with a regulatory
body







22. Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent
to which assessment processes are rigorous, set at the
correct standard, ensure equity of treatment for students and
have been fairly conducted



23. Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear
criteria. Standard setting must be employed for summative
assessments



24. Where appropriate, patient/peer/customer feedback
should contribute to the assessment process
25. Where possible, multiple samples of performance must
be taken to ensure the validity and reliability of the
1




Reflective practice should not be part of the assessment process in a way that risks effective student
use

assessment conclusion
26. The standard expected of students in each area to be
assessed must be clear and students and staff involved
in assessment must be aware of this standard



GDC comments
Requirement 16: To award the qualification, providers must be assured that
students have demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes,
at a level sufficient to indicate they are safe to begin practice. This assurance
should be underpinned by a coherent approach to aggregation and triangulation, as
well as the principles of assessment referred to in these standards (Requirement
Met)
Learning outcome coverage as mapped in the evidence provided prior to the inspection
satisfied the inspection panel how the School is assured that students demonstrate attainment
across the full range of learning outcomes. The School showed a clear assessment strategy
with a defined progression pathway for students to advance year on year before being
considered for sign-up to sit the final examination in Year 5. Formative, progression, and
summative assessments were mapped into a comprehensive timetable, which could be
tracked and reviewed.
Student progress is monitored by the Progress and Clinical Progress Committees outlined in
Requirement 9. There was evidence of strong centrally recorded continuous assessment with
poorly performing candidates identified early and provided with extra teaching support and
pastoral care as necessary. To be signed up for the final examinations, Year 5 students must
satisfy the Clinical Progress Committee that they have reached a satisfactory level of clinical
ability across a full range of clinical areas in addition to completing all progression
requirements within the Year 5 module (Clinical Practice 5). The lead GDC quality assurance
officer was in attendance at the Progress and Clinical Progress Committees that convened in
April 2013 and noted that School procedures were appropriate and had been adhered to.
The inspection panel was confident that the School’s approach to the aggregation and
triangulation of assessment results was robust and well-managed. Two inspectors and the lead
GDC quality assurance officer attended the Examination Board on 13 June. The inspectors felt
there was some complexity to the amalgamation of the final results with components from
older elements of the programme design still being phased out. It was thought that some
consideration could be given to simplifying how the grades fit together to arrive at a final
outcome, but it was also appreciated that this was likely to happen naturally as the new
structure of the course reaches its first full cycle of students progressing through the entire five
years. The external examiners voiced a similar opinion though their comments were generally
very positive regarding the examination processes, and each expressed full confidence in the
assessment outcomes.
As detailed in the introduction, at the time of the inspection students in the later years had
begun their studies on a programme designed to meet the learning outcomes from The First
Five Years. The inspectors were told that the School believed that the programme delivered
students who would also meet the new learning outcomes from Preparing for Practice,
following the 2011 redesign of the award. There was evidence that the learning outcomes
embedded within the programme have been continually mapped to adhere to both GDC
publications.

Requirement 17: The provider will have in place management systems to plan, monitor
and record the assessment of students throughout the programme against each of the
learning outcomes (Requirement Met)
The inspection panel was impressed with the School’s excellent management systems to
monitor and record student assessment. Central recording of assessments is updated on a
university wider system called “Banner”. The spreadsheets within the database offer a welldefined picture of student attainment broken down module by module, which allows for
straightforward cross-referencing to individual learning outcomes. The records are updated on
a weekly basis.
Student clinical logbook data is also centrally recorded and displayed in a clear spreadsheet
format. Figures for all student experience are itemised and summarised under the core clinical
areas of direct/indirect restorations, paediatric dentistry, prosthetics, endodontics, minor oral
surgery, routine extractions and radiology. There was evidence of a further breakdown of
clinical activity within students’ assigned tutor teams. This data is colour coordinated with any
deficiencies in attainment highlighted by a traffic light system of green, amber and red. The
results could be displayed within simple graphs and were mapped to specific assessments
areas.
In discussion with the inspectors, staff and students showed a good understanding of the
recording systems and felt there was an abundance of data available to indicate the level of
clinical performance being achieved. The inspectors felt the management systems they
observed were an example of notable practice in this area.
Requirement 18: Assessment must involve a range of methods appropriate to the
learning outcomes and these should be in line with current practice and routinely
monitored, quality assured and developed (Requirement Met)
The inspection panel reviewed evidence of an extensive variety of assessment methods
utilised across the programme to assess knowledge, applied knowledge, understanding and
clinical skills. The Director of Student Education has delegated the responsibility for the policy
regarding assessment procedures to the Assessment and Standards Board and an
Assessment Panel. The terms of references for these meetings were clear with robust
underpinning policy. There was evidence of a strong commitment to continuously developing
assessments and assessment strategy and adopting a dynamic approach to embracing
feedback in this area.
The final examinations were conducted with care and attention to detail. Examination
conditions were maintained throughout with dental nurses facilitating the timing of sections and
ensuring students were guided to the correct areas. The inspectors observed a consistent
approach to examining candidates by the examiners, who marked in pairs. Independent
marking was seen to be undertaken before discussion was conducted to agree a final award
within the team. Model answers were clear and well followed. The inspectors felt the range and
level of questioning was satisfactory and observed a discriminating process that distinguished
between weak and strong students.

Requirement 19: Students will have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and will undertake each activity relating to patient care on
sufficient occasions to enable them to develop the skills and the level of competency to
achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes (Requirement Met)
The inspection panel was satisfied that students had been exposed to an appropriate breadth
of patients and procedures. Recorded episodes of student clinical activity were high with a
clear context for the nature of the student activity undertaken. As outlined in several earlier
Requirements, student development was well monitored and candidates who may have
become deficient in a clinical area were identified and supported with remedial training.
The inspectors felt that the three outreach placements added a significant value and variety to
the students’ clinical exposure. There was evidence of a good patient mix at the sites and the
students were vocal about how much the experience developed their abilities to communicate
with patients, work within the dental team, as well as affording them the opportunity to hone
their clinical skills. Electronic patient records, hosted by the primary care trusts in the area,
were in operation at the three placements and further enriched the student exposure.
In addition to the strong levels of clinical exposure, the inspection panel also felt that dental
students gained considerable benefit from the School integration of the wider dental team into
the learning environment. Leeds Dental Institute also trains Hygienist/Therapists, Dental
Technicians and Dental Nurses. The students are immediately brought together in shared
lectures. The dental students have two modules that are tied in with the Diploma in Dental
Hygiene and Dental Therapy. Shared care on clinics has been piloted and continues to be
developed.
The student groups that were interviewed informed the inspectors of several advantages to
learning alongside other members of the dental team. There was agreement that it contributed
to their communication skills and helped them appreciate the holistic principles of shared
patient care.
Requirement 20: The provider should seek to improve student performance by
encouraging reflection and by providing feedback 2 (Requirement Met)
Though the School considered this area to be only partly met within their pre-inspection
documents, the inspection panel felt there was evidence that student reflection was well
embedded within the programme. There was an active commitment to encouraging students to
consider their practice, with reflection recorded in student log books and reflective learning
outcomes summatively assessed. Staff and students had a good understanding of the
importance of reflective practice and showed a commitment to always striving to improve
performance.
Feedback to students is provided in several formats. There is written feedback for assignments
and clinical assessments. Feedback sessions are organised following the Year 3 and 4 OSCEs
where students are given their individual scores for each station and written feedback from
each station examiner. Tutor-recorded audio feedback can be accessed in the Virtual Learning
Environment (VLE) and end of term meetings with clinical tutors offer the opportunity for overall
feedback on performance to be reviewed with the student at the end of each session of the
programme.
In discussion, students felt that there was an adequate level of feedback given to them though
2

Reflective practice should not be part of the assessment process in a way that risks effective student
use

it was thought this area could be improved. This opinion was supported in the results of the
2011 National Student Survey, which highlighted feedback as a key area for improvement for
the School. The School has responded well to this and the 2012 results have shown a 34%
increase in student satisfaction on the levels of feedback provided. The inspection panel
considered there to be a strong ethos of providing feedback to students and the School has
demonstrated its ability to implement feedback constructively and improve course delivery.
Requirement 21: Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills, experience
and training to undertake the task of assessment, appropriate general or specialist
registration with a regulatory body (Requirement Met)
The School provided the details of internal and external examiners, which assured the
inspection panel that the examiners had the appropriate skills, experience and training to
undertake the task of assessment. The inspectors were pleased to see evidence of tutors
shadowing experienced examiners at the clinical assessments in June. It was felt this was an
excellent development opportunity for staff to begin training as potential examiners of the
future.
Requirement 22: Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent to
which assessment processes are rigorous, set at the correct standard, ensure
equity of treatment for students and have been fairly conducted (Requirement Met)
The inspection panel met with the external examiners and heard assurances regarding the
rigour, standard and fairness of the examination process. They advised the panel that there
was an excellent attitude within the School for utilising feedback. The external examiners
indicated that they would have liked to have been more involved in assessing candidates,
particularly borderline cases where internal examiners may have welcomed another individual
to mediate the outcome. The inspectors noted that QAA guidance states that external
examiners “are not normally responsible for, or involved, the assessment of individual
students.” The guidance may offer some scope for external examiners to mediate borderline
assessment decisions should it be possible for the external examiners see all borderline
candidates across the cohort.
Requirement 23: Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear criteria.
Standard setting must be employed for summative assessments (Requirement Met)
The inspection panel was satisfied that the assessment model is fair and set against clear
criteria. However it was noted that standard setting was not always clear for written papers and
requires some improvement to make the processes followed more explicit.
The Undergraduate Assessment Panel has responsibility for assessing progression and
summative assessments. The inspectors were provided with details for how criteria are
accepted after consideration of marking, case reports, presentations and clinical skills tests.
This appeared to be a reasonable and well considered approach to constructing assessments
which ensured as much clarity as possible for what is expected of students.
The inspection panel reviewed the standardised marking schemes that are in place for written
short answer papers. Students confirmed that they had access to this information in advance
of taking the assessments. Where a written paper is primarily based on single best answer
style questions, a numerical standard setting process is undertaken though the inspectors
could not identify a formal standard-setting technique such as Angoff and felt this area could
be made more distinct.

Requirement 24: Where appropriate, patient/peer/customer feedback should
contribute to the assessment process (Requirement Partly Met)
The School acknowledged that the effective use patient and peer feedback was an
element of the programme that was still being developed.
The inspection panel was told that there had not previously been a formal mechanism to
record patient feedback. The School implemented a patient evaluation process in
restorative clinics in October 2012. This initiative invited patients to give direct feedback
about how well the student dentist has managed their care. It is an expectation that Year 3
students obtain two patient evaluations per term and Year 4 and 5 students collect three
per term. The results are discussed within the tutor teams and disseminated to students.
The inspection panel was mindful that this is an area that several Schools are continuing to
develop and felt Leeds Dental Institute was working well towards fulfilling this Requirement.
Senior management explained their plans to roll out the patient evaluation process to all
clinical areas and to continuously review the system to see what aspects could be incorporated
into assessments. The inspectors appreciated that formalising patient feedback into
meaningful and consistent performance data was not straightforward and would require further
work.
As part of their communication skills training, students peer assess as well as receive
comments from simulated patients. In Year 5, group work exercises include peer
assessments, which students indicated were very helpful. The inspectors felt there was
more scope for incorporating peer assessment within the programme and the School may
seek to develop this area further.
Requirement 25: Where possible, multiple samples of performance must be taken
to ensure the validity and reliability of the assessment conclusion (Requirement
Met)
There was evidence that multiple samples of student performance are recorded by the
School and triangulated to ensure a valid and reliable assessment conclusion. As outlined
in Requirements 18 and 23, the inspection panel felt there was an extensive variety of
assessment methods utilised across the programme to assess knowledge, applied
knowledge, understanding and clinical skills. Student activities are well monitored and this
allows for strongly evidenced decisions about a candidate’s abilities based on a range of
aspects of his or her performance.
Requirement 26: The standard expected of students in each area to be assessed
must be clear and students and staff involved in assessment must be aware of this
standard (Requirement Met)
Staff and students indicated that they were aware of the expected standard and the
assessment strategy of the School. Assessment outlines are well structured and available to
students from the beginning of each year of study. Assessments, including the continuous
clinical assessments are marked against grade descriptors of excellent quality, which could be

followed and fully understood by the inspectors.
Progression and summative assessments are set against clear frameworks. When final year
students were considered for their eligibility to sign-up for the final examinations, evidence was
presented at the Progress and Clinical Progress Committees that was robust and validated
from several areas of performance. The inspection panel was able to follow the audit of
decision making in a transparent sign-up process with documented evidence for how follow-up
considerations had been addressed.
It was felt that this area greatly benefited from the excellent tracking of student performance,
which established those who were progressing at an acceptable level, those progressing at an
advanced level, and any weaker students who required further support or remedial training.

Actions
Req.
Number
16

Actions for the provider

Due Date
(if applicable)
The School should review the amalgamation of final assessment
Update to be
results and consider whether a simpler framework could be utilised provided
through the
to bring each component together into the final awarding of a
2014 GDC
grade.
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

19

The School should continue with its plans to operate shared care
on clinics with student dentists and those students studying to be
registered as other members of the dental team.

Update to be
provided
through the
2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

23

The School should improve the clarity of its standard setting for
written exams and any other area of assessment where there has
been a numerical standard setting exercise undertaken.

Update to be
provided
through the
2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

24

i. The School must continue to develop its use of patient feedback
within the programme and review where it may contribute to the
assessment process.

Update to be
provided
through the
2014 GDC
Annual
ii. The School must consider whether peer review can be further
incorporated into the programme and contribute to the assessment Monitoring
exercise
process.

Standard 4 – Equality and diversity
The provider must comply with equal opportunities and discrimination legislation and
practice. They must also advocate this practice to students
Requirements

27. Providers must adhere to current legislation and best practice
guidance relating to equality and diversity

Met



28. Staff will receive training on equality and diversity,
development and appraisal mechanisms will include this
29. Providers will convey to students the importance of
compliance with equality and diversity law and principles both
during training and after they begin practice

Partly Not
met
met





GDC comments
Requirement 27: Providers must adhere to current legislation and best practice
guidance relating to equality and diversity (Requirement Met)
The inspection panel reviewed the School policy for equality and diversity and were assured
that current legislation and best practice guidance was being followed. The inspectors were
informed that the University has a dedicated Equality and Diversity service that has the remit
for strategic development of the area. There was a clear commitment to working across the
main protected characteristics with dynamic policy relating to patients, staff and students.
Requirement 28: Staff will receive training on equality and diversity, development and
appraisal mechanisms will include this (Requirement Partly Met)
The School acknowledged that during their preparation for being inspected against the
Standards for Education, they identified that some staff involved in curriculum delivery from the
wider parts of the University had not had equality and diversity training. A programme of
training was run in order to address this gap and the inspectors were shown evidence that
51% compliance rate had been improved to an 81% compliance rate by the final examinations
in June 2013. The School were working with the remaining staff identified to ensure training is
received.
The inspectors wished to see the School incorporate future reviews of this element of staff
development within an annual appraisal mechanism.
Requirement 29: Providers will convey to students the importance of compliance with
equality and diversity law and principles of the four UK nations both during training and
after they begin practice (Requirement Met)
Staff and students showed a good awareness of equality and diversity and their responsibility
to comply with the relevant laws. Despite the lack of formal teaching, students appreciated

there would be differences from country to country within the UK. Currently equality and
diversity law is taught for England to cover learning outcomes 6.5 and 1.71 of Preparing for
Practice. In light of the new GDC Standards for Education the differences of the four UK
nations will be incorporated within future teaching. The outline syllabus in this area has been
amended and approved by the ITSEC. This will become taught material from 2013/14
academic year.
Actions
Req.
Actions for the provider
Number
28
i. The School must continue to provide equality and diversity
training to wider university staff involved in programme delivery.
ii. The School must incorporate a review of equality and diversity
training in staff appraisals.

29

The School should continue with its plans to formally teach
equality and diversity law and principles of the four UK nations.

Due Date
(if applicable)
Update to be
provided
through the
2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise
Update to be
provided
through the
2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

Summary of Actions

Req.
Action
Number

Observations

Due date

Response from Provider
7

9

10

16

The School should develop a School protocol for raising
concerns specific to dental staff and students. The
document should be aligned with Trust providers,
outreach placements and regularly emphasised to the
students across programme delivery.

Our current protocol for raising concerns will be
amended to include procedures for raising
concerns specific to dental staff and students. The
existing Code of Professional Conduct and Fitness
to Practice for Dental Students document, which is
signed annually by all students, will be amended to
include a statement regarding the protocol.
The School should continue with its plan for the
Work is ongoing to include the mapping of GDC
mapping of GDC learning outcomes to be included in all learning outcomes in our module and programme
review documents.
standard module and programme review documents.

Update to be
provided through
the 2014 GDC
Annual Monitoring
exercise

Update to be
provided through
the 2014 GDC
Annual Monitoring
exercise

i. The School should ensure that it carries out its plan to Yearly visits to outreach placements will continue Update to be
undertake yearly visits to outreach placements.
as part of our quality assurance processes.
provided through
the 2014 GDC
ii. The School should consider the benefits of creating
The School is reviewing the academic leadership Annual Monitoring
an outreach coordinator and/or an outreach liaison
and management of outreach with a view to exercise
committee to have overall responsibility for quality
appointing an outreach co-ordinator with
assuring placements.
responsibility for ensuring quality dental education
and safe practice. This individual will be a member
of the Undergraduate Programmes Management
Committee, which will facilitate liaison between the
Dental School and outreach placements.
The School should review the amalgamation of final
The School recognises that this process is overly Update to be
assessment results and consider whether a simpler
complex and is currently looking at options to provided through

framework could be utilised to bring each component
together into the final awarding of a grade.

19

23

24

28

simplify it. We will be seeking the advice of the the 2014 GDC
University and our external examiners in this Annual Monitoring
exercise
regard.

The School should continue with its plans to operate
shared care on clinics with student dentists and those
students studying to be registered as other members of
the dental team.

Pairing of students across the years is now well
established. We plan to extend this arrangement to
increase shared care to the benefit of our students
and patients alike. Where appropriate more senior
students are delegating elements of care to Dental
Hygiene and Dental Therapy students. The School
is setting up a working party to look at
opportunities to extend this.
The School should improve the clarity of its standard
From this academic year all assessments will be
setting for written exams and any other area of
standard set. Existing documentation and
assessment where there has been a numerical standard protocols have been revised to make the process
clearer.
setting exercise undertaken.

Update to be
provided through
the 2014 GDC
Annual Monitoring
exercise

i. The School must continue to develop its use of patient Our recently introduced system of patient feedback
feedback within the programme and review where it
is currently being audited and discussions are
may contribute to the assessment process.
ongoing about how this may contribute to the
assessment process in the future.
ii. The School must consider whether peer review can
be further incorporated into the programme and
Our initial experience of peer review in summative
contribute to the assessment process.
assessment has been problematic; however our
experience in formative assessment has been
more positive. Going forward we plan to extend
peer review where appropriate, for instance in
outreach involving all members of the dental team.
i. The School must continue to provide equality and
Equality and diversity training is now part of regular
diversity training to wider university staff involved in
training for NHS staff and University staff with
programme delivery.
honorary NHS contracts and records are kept.
Equality and diversity training for wider University
staff is available and we will ensure that all staff
ii. The School must incorporate a review of equality
and diversity training in staff appraisals.
complete this regularly and that This is recorded

Update to be
provided through
the 2014 GDC
Annual Monitoring
exercise

Update to be
provided through
the 2014 GDC
Annual Monitoring
exercise

Update to be
provided through
the 2014 GDC
Annual Monitoring
exercise

29

The School should continue with its plans to formally
teach equality and diversity law and principles of the
four UK nations.

The training needs of all our staff are reviewed on
an annual basis and equality and diversity training
needs will be considered as part of this process.
This is now incorporated into the teaching on the Update to be
programme.
provided through
the 2014 GDC
Annual Monitoring
exercise

Observations from the provider on content of report
To monitor progress against this action plan it will be a standing agenda item at our Undergraduate Programmes Management Committee.

Recommendation to the GDC
The inspectors recommend that this qualification is sufficient for holders to apply for registration as a dentist with the General Dental Council.

