INSPECTION REPORT
Education Provider /
Awarding Body :

Liverpool University

Programme / Award /
Qualification:

Bachelor in Dental Surgery (BDS)

Remit and Purpose:

Full inspection referencing the Standards for
Education to determine continuing sufficiency of
the award for the purpose of registration with the
General Dental Council (GDC) as a dentist

Learning Outcomes:

The First Five Years (Dentist)

Programme Inspection Dates:

5 & 6 Nov 2012

Examination Inspection
Dates:

18 March 2013
22 April 2013
28 & 29 May 2013
7 June 2013

Inspection Panel:

Philip Bunnell (Lay Member and Chair)
Peter Heasman (Dentist)
James Newton (Dentist)
Fizan Tahir (Dentist)

GDC Staff:

Laura Harrison (Lead)
Peter Butler

Outcome:

Recommended that the Liverpool University BDS
programme remains sufficient for registration as
a dentist

1

Inspection summary
Overall, the inspectors found the Liverpool University BDS to be a robust qualification, which
produces graduates who are at the level of a ‘safe beginner’. Students gain access to a wide
patient mix and range of procedures in hospital, general dental practices and community
dental services. The level of exposure to the diverse disciplines of dentistry is to be
commended.
The mapping of the curriculum and assessments to the GDC learning outcomes within The
First Five Years was not evident to the inspectors within the system used to monitor learner
development (Longitudinal Integrative Foundation Training Undergraduate to Postgraduate
Pathway or LIFTUPP). However, the inspectors had sight of the paper-based mapping and
considered there to be appropriate use of a range of assessments and that each learning
outcome is assessed in a variety of ways. The LIFTUPP system which is used by clinical
staff within the Dental School facilitates well calibrated and triangulated longitudinal
assessment of students and there are good levels of supervision in each of the clinics.
Regular monitoring and ‘progress checks’ are effective in identifying students with
developmental needs and result in targeted training where necessary.
There is generally sound internal and external quality assurance of the qualification with an
effective quality management framework in place. Students reported that they are happy
with most aspects of the programme and feel that there are useful mechanisms in place for
providing feedback and addressing concerns. There is a strong commitment to ensuring
students recognise the importance of patient safety and fitness to practise principles.
The graduate entry students are well integrated into the programme. These students enter
the undergraduate programme in Year 2 after having completed an accelerated course
which covers some of the areas covered in Year 1. The graduate entry students undertake
additional study in Year 2 and by Year 3 both sets of students are at the same stage of
learning.
Although the inspectors faced initial challenges in accessing, navigating and understanding
LIFTUPP, these were resolved after being provided with various explanations and
instructional ‘YouTube’ videos, which the External Examiners also indicated that they found
useful. The inspectors recognised that LIFTUPP is not yet fully functional, however it already
provides detailed information and grades relating to multiple treatment episodes for each
student in Years 3-5. It is anticipated that once fully operational, LIFTUPP will become a
comprehensive mechanism for tutors and students to review progress on both an individual
student and cohort-wide basis.
A number of in-course assessments which do not feature on LIFTUPP were not considered
at progress meetings or meetings to sign-up students to the final assessment and it was not
evident where the marks for these assessments were recorded or reviewed.
The quality assurance of outreach placements was below the expected standard and this
was recognised by the School. There was evidence that considerable clinical activity was
gained in outreach, some of which appeared to contribute to progression decisions. The
inspectors concluded that the School should apply the same rigour to the quality assurance
of education and assessment to outreach as is applied within the School. In addition, the
inspectors determined that the School should place greater reliance on clinical data gained
from activity in outreach when determining students’ progression.
The panel wishes to thank the staff, students, and external stakeholders involved with the
BDS programme for their co-operation and assistance with the inspection.
2

Inspection process and purpose of Inspection
1.

As part of its duty to protect patients and promote high standards within the professions
it regulates, the General Dental Council (GDC) quality assures the education and
training of student dentists and dental care professionals (DCPs) at institutions whose
qualifications enable the holder to apply for registration with the GDC and new
qualifications where it is intended that the qualification will lead to registration.

2.

The aim of this quality assurance activity is to ensure that these institutions produce a
new registrant who has demonstrated, on graduation, that he or she has met the
outcomes required for registration with the GDC. This is to ensure that students who
obtain a qualification leading to registration are fit to practise at the level of a safe
beginner.

3.

The inspection focuses on four Standards, with a total of 29 underlying Requirements.
These are contained in the document Standards for Education.

4.

The purpose of this inspection was to make a recommendation to the Council of the
GDC regarding the ‘sufficiency’ of the programme for registration as a dentist in the UK.
The GDC’s powers are derived under Part II, Section 9 of the Dentists Act 1984 (as
amended) to determine sufficiency of the programme.

5.

Inspection reports may highlight areas of strength and draw attention to areas requiring
improvement and development, including actions that are required to be undertaken by
the provider. Where an action is needed for a Requirement to be met, the term ‘must’ is
used to describe the obligation on the provider to undertake this action. For these
actions the inspectors may stipulate a specific timescale by which the action must be
completed or when an update on progress must be provided. In their observations on
the content of the report, the provider should confirm the anticipated date by which
these actions will be completed. Where an action would improve how a Requirement is
met, the term ‘should’ is used and for these actions there will be no due date stipulated.
Providers will be asked to report on the progress in addressing the required actions
through the annual monitoring process. Serious concerns about a lack of progress may
result in further inspections or other quality assurance activity.

6.

The provider of the qualification has the opportunity to provide factual corrections on the
draft report. Following the production of the final report the provider is asked to submit
observations on, or objections to, the report and the actions listed. Where the inspection
panel have recommended that the programme is sufficient for registration, the Council
of the GDC have delegated responsibility to the GDC Registrar to consider the
recommendations of the panel. Should an inspection panel not be able to recommend
sufficiency, the report and observations would be presented to the Council of the GDC
for consideration.

The Inspection
7.

This report sets out the findings of an inspection of the Bachelor of Dental Surgery
awarded by Liverpool University. The GDC publication Standards for Education (version
1.0 November 2012) was used as a framework for this inspection. This inspection forms
part of a series of BDS inspections being undertaken by the GDC in 2012-2014.

8.

The inspection comprised five visits. The first visit was carried out on 5 and 6 November
2012 and involved meetings with programme staff responsible for the management,
3

delivery and assessment of the programme and a selection of BDS students. The
second and third visits involved attendance at the ‘Clinical Assessment Panel’ meetings
parts 1 and 2, which took place on 18 March 2013 and 22 April 2013. A further visit on
28 and 29 May incorporated attendance at the final OSCE examination and meetings
with the Head of School and Director of the BDS programme and on 7 June, members
of the inspection panel attended the final Examination Board meeting.
9.

The report contains the findings of the inspection panel across the five visits and with
consideration to supporting documentation prepared by the School to evidence how the
individual requirements under the Standards for Education have been met.

Overview of Qualification
10. The University of Liverpool delivers and awards the BDS to undergraduate and graduate
entry students. The annual intake is 60 to the undergraduate and 15 to the graduate
entry programme. The duration of the undergraduate programme is five years and the
School also runs a four year postgraduate pathway. The University of Liverpool also
offers a Diploma in Dental Hygiene and Therapy. A BSc in Dental Hygiene and Therapy
is temporarily ‘on hold’ whilst changes to the programme are made.
11. The BDS programme is non-modular and based on an integrated spiral structure. The
programme has been designed with the focus on preparing the student for foundation
training and independent practice. The programme aims to equip the student with the
required underpinning knowledge, clinical experience and insight to practise as a ‘safe
beginner’. This is fundamentally achieved through the ‘mapping’ of programme aims,
objectives, and learning outcomes, which are also mapped to the GDC learning
outcomes contained within The First Five Years.
12. The teaching and most of the clinical training takes place within the Liverpool Dental
School and Liverpool University Dental Hospital. Students attend a range of hospital
clinics in Year 1, where they observe treatment and they treat patients in hospital clinics
between the final term of Year 2 until the end of the programme. Students also
undertake clinical activity outside of Liverpool University Dental Hospital. In Year 1, they
deliver oral health education whilst on short community placements. In Years 4 and 5,
students treat patients in both a general dental service (GDS) clinic and a
community/salaried dental service (CDS/SDS) clinic, spending ten days in each over the
course of a term. Students also attend consultant clinics at three other local hospitals.
As part of the oral and maxillofacial surgery component, students observe patient
treatment at University Hospital Aintree in Year 4 and 5. During their final year, students
attend the Accident and Emergency department and the Ultrasound clinics at Royal
Liverpool University Hospital and they attend Alder Hey Children’s Hospital.
13. Students on the BDS programme are assessed clinically predominantly via longitudinal
continuous assessment. Reviews of clinical progress are made via formative ‘Clinical
Development Monitoring Panel’ (CDMP) meetings, which are held at regular intervals
and at the summative ‘Clinical Assessment Panel’ (CAP) meetings. The CAP meetings
act as a ‘gateway’ to the end of year examinations and the CAP in BDS 5 is part of the
final year examination. A range of other assessment methods is used during the
programme, and end of year examinations include objective structured clinical
examinations (OSCEs), written papers consisting of ‘extended matching items’ (EMIs)
‘single best answer questions’ (SBAs) and ‘short answer questions’ (SAQs).
Progression from one year to the next is dependent on successful completion of the
assessments for any given year.
4

14. Liverpool Dental School have implemented a new IT programme entitled ‘Longitudinal
Integrative Foundation Training Undergraduate to Postgraduate Pathway’ (LIFTUPP).
The aim for the system, once fully operational, is to continuously and longitudinally
monitor learner development with easily accessible academic and clinical performance
data for both students and tutors. LIFTUPP is designed to map learning outcomes to
assessment and delivery, in addition to providing a means by which to centrally record
and calibrate the assessment of students’ longitudinal clinical activity. LIFTUPP thus
supports the delivery of the BDS programme as a central mapping, monitoring and
recording system. LIFTUPP also provides students with a portfolio of clinical activity that
they can take forward into foundation training.

Evaluation of Qualification against the Standards for Education
15. As stated above, the Standards for Education were used as a framework for this
inspection. Consideration was given to the fact that the Standards for Education were
approved in late 2012 and that it may take time for providers to make amendments to
programmes to fully meet all of the Requirements under the Standards and to gather the
evidence to demonstrate that each Requirement is being met. The inspection panel was
fully aware of this and the findings of this report should be read with this in mind.
16. The provider was requested to undertake a self-evaluation of the programme against
the individual Requirements under the Standards for Education. This involved stating
whether each Requirement is met, partly met or not met and to provide evidence in
support of their evaluation. The inspection panel examined this evidence, requested
further documentary evidence and gathered further evidence from discussions with staff
and students.
17. The inspection panel used the following descriptors to reach a decision on the extent to
which the BDS of Liverpool University meets each Requirement:
A Requirement is met if:
“There is sufficient appropriate evidence derived from the inspection process. This evidence
provides the inspectors with broad confidence that the provider demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students is supportive of
documentary evidence and the evidence is robust, consistent and not contradictory. There
may be minor deficiencies in the evidence supplied but these are likely to be
inconsequential.”
A Requirement is partly met if:
“Evidence derived from the inspection process is either incomplete or lacks detail and, as
such, fails to convince the inspection panel that the provider fully demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students may not fully
support the evidence submitted or there may be contradictory information in the evidence
provided. There is, however, some evidence of compliance and it is likely that either (a) the
appropriate evidence can be supplied in a short time frame, or, (b) any deficiencies identified
can be addressed and evidenced in the annual monitoring process.”

5

A Requirement is not met if:
“The provider cannot provide evidence to demonstrate a requirement or the evidence
provided is not convincing. The information gathered at the inspection through meetings with
staff and students does not support the evidence provided or the evidence is inconsistent
and/or incompatible with other findings. The deficiencies identified are such as to give rise to
serious concern and will require an immediate action plan from the provider. The
consequences of not meeting a Requirement in terms of the overall sufficiency of a
programme will depend upon the compliance of the provider across the range of
Requirements and the possible implications for public protection.”

Standard 1 – Protecting patients
Providers must be aware of their duty to protect the public. Providers must ensure that
patient safety is paramount and care of patients is of an appropriate standard. Any risk
to the safety of patients and their care by students must be minimised
Met Partly
Not
Requirements
met
1.

Students will provide patient care only when they have
demonstrated adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical
procedures, the student should be assessed as competent in
the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients

met



2.

Patients must be made aware that they are being treated by
students and give consent



3.

Students will only provide patient care in an environment
which is safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with
relevant legislation and requirements regarding patient care



4.

When providing patient care and services, students are to be
supervised appropriately according to the activity and the
student’s stage of development.



5.

Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained.
Clinical supervisors must have appropriate general or
specialist registration with a regulatory body



6.

Students and those involved in the delivery of education and
training must be encouraged to raise concerns if they identify
any risks to patient safety



7.

Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be
taken by the provider



8.

Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and
apply as required. The content and significance of the student
fitness to practise procedures must be conveyed to students
and aligned to GDC student fitness to practise guidance. Staff
involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar
with the GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance.



GDC comments
6

Requirement 1: Students will provide patient care only when they have demonstrated
adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical procedures, the student should be
assessed as competent in the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients (Requirement Met)
The panel commend the School for their approach to pre-clinical training and assessment.
Evidence obtained during the course of the inspection assured the inspectors that students
were only allowed to commence clinical activity once they had demonstrated adequate
knowledge and skill. The panel noted there was external oversight of pre-clinical assessment
and there appeared to be good record management relating to student assessment data.
There are ‘new skills’ components in Years 2, 3 and 4, during which students develop their
clinical skills in the clinical skills laboratory. Full attendance during these components is
compulsory. The largest ‘new skills’ component is the ‘Introduction to Clinical Practice’ which is
held in Year 2 and culminates in a multi-component and rigorous assessment called the
‘Clinical Readiness Exam’. This exam assesses clinical knowledge, skills and professionalism
and the inspectors considered this a robust ‘gateway’ to treating patients. The ‘new skills’
components in Years 3 and 4 cover subjects such as endodontics and minor oral surgery.
In order to progress through the ‘new skill’ component, students must consistently achieve a
satisfactory grade during their training and pass a summative examination at the end of the
course. If students do not pass the summative assessment, they must undertake further
training in the clinical skills laboratory, re-take and pass the relevant assessment before they
are allowed to offer treatment to patients in the new discipline.

Requirement 2: Patients must be made aware that they are being treated by students
and give consent (Requirement Met)
The Trust policy on consent underpins the actions taken by the Dental School to address this
Requirement. Students are required to sign an Annual Student Agreement, which obliges them
to ensure all patients they treat are made aware of their status as a student, prior to treatment.
Students wear name badges at all times whilst on clinic, which identify them as students and
there is signage in the Dental School clinics indicating to patients that students may provide
their treatment.
The operational processes used for obtaining and recording patient agreement to be treated by
a student were dependant on the Dental School clinic. There seemed to be a clear and well
documented process for obtaining patient consent for treatment by a student in the restorative
clinic. Patients are referred to the Dental School for restorative treatment by a student via a
specific NHS form. The form is explained to, and then signed by the patient. Once the referral
has been received, the patient is asked to sign a ‘patient agreement form’ which confirms they
consent to receiving treatment by students under supervision. In other clinics of the Dental
School, however, patients are asked to verbally confirm their agreement to be treated by
students and a record of this is kept in their patient case notes.
The inspectors encourage the School to adopt the ‘patient agreement form’ or similar in all
clinics, including outreach locations, as this provides clear documentary evidence and reduces
the risk of issues arising regarding consent.
Requirement 3: Students will only provide patient care in an environment which is safe
and appropriate. The provider must comply with relevant legislation and requirements
regarding patient care (Requirement Met)
7

Liverpool Dental Hospital adheres to Trust regulations concerning patient care and there was
evidence of very good governance in relation to the oversight of health and safety within the
clinics. All clinics and outreach settings are subject to inspections by the Care Quality
Commission and there were no concerns relating to any of the locations used by the students.
Requirement 4: When providing patient care and services, students are to be
supervised appropriately according to the activity and the student’s stage of
development (Requirement Met)
The level of supervision provided to students is very good and directly related to the stage they
are at within the programme and the discipline they are studying. The highest level of
supervision occurs whilst the students are on specialist clinics in Years 4 and 5 and at no point
during the course is the staff-to-student ratio greater than 1:8. Students the inspectors spoke
to were content with the level of support and supervision they received.
Requirement 5: Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained. Clinical
supervisors must have appropriate general or specialist registration with a regulatory
body (Requirement Met)
All clinical supervisors involved in the programme are registered with the relevant healthcare
regulatory body and appropriately trained. There is an annual training day on assessment for
clinical teaching staff. Tutors who supervise students in outreach also attend an annual training
day during which clinical teaching and updates on the programme structure are covered. The
inspectors were pleased to note that any new members of staff are initially mentored and then
supervised in their assessment of students and in their use of LIFTUPP.
The School provides opportunities and support for current and new staff to maintain and
enhance their educational skills to take account of best practice. There is an annual Personal
Development Review, which ensures that members of staff are up to date with their CPD and
educational training.
Requirement 6: Students and those involved in the delivery of education and training
must be encouraged to raise concerns if they identify any risks to patient safety
(Requirement Met)
The inspectors noted that there is a University ‘Public Interest Disclosure’ policy for raising
concerns which the Dental School must adhere to, although this does not relate specifically to
patient safety. The Dental School also has to comply with an NHS Trust ‘Incident Reporting’
policy and the related set of procedures.
An annual student induction informs and reminds students of the need to raise concerns if they
identify a risk to patient safety and, as mentioned in Requirement 2, students sign an annual
agreement which requires them to raise such a concern, if identified. The inspectors noted that
the students they met with confirmed their understanding of this obligation. In addition, the
issue of raising concerns relating to patient safety is covered during a component on Law and
Ethics, which is taught in the final year of the programme.
The School indicated that clinical teaching staff would be familiar with the patient safety
elements of the GDC Standard for Dental Professionals by virtue of the fact they were GDC
registrants.

8

Requirement 7: Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be taken by
the provider (Requirement Met)
The ‘Incident Reporting’ policy and evidence seen by the inspectors suggested that measures
are in place to deal appropriately with patient safety issues, should they arise. The Dental
School uses the electronic ‘DATIX’ system to record and monitor the management of safety
issues and the inspectors were provided with a basic incident report for January – December
2011, which contained clear and comprehensive information relating to minor safety issues
during that period.
Tutors are able to raise concerns, if a patient safety issue arises during treatment by a student,
by the use of a ‘clinical alert button’. The inspectors were advised that the action of pressing
the clinical alert button would instigate targeted training for the student in question and that a
‘red flag’ would feature on the student’s LIFTUPP records. The inspectors considered this to be
a useful mechanism in theory however they were unclear about its use in practice. They could
not establish where exactly the button was located and what the criteria for its use were. The
inspectors were also unclear about how the School reviewed the incident, instigated remedial
action and assessed the consequences of it in terms of the student’s on-going clinical activity.
Requirement 8: Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and apply as
required. The content and significance of the student fitness to practise procedures
must be conveyed to students and aligned to GDC student fitness to practise guidance.
Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar with the GDC Student
Fitness to Practise Guidance (Requirement Met)
The University has an appropriate Student Fitness to Practise policy and students are made
aware of this during their annual inductions. The principles within the GDC Student Fitness to
Practise guidance are contained in the Annual Student Agreement which students are required
to sign. Inspectors were informed that members of staff were familiar with the GDC Student
Fitness to Practise guidance and that this is relied upon in the curriculum.
The Dental School carefully monitors patterns of behaviour throughout the course of study and
the inspectors understood that this was achieved, in part, by the use and interpretation of the
‘red flag’ referred to in Requirement 7. Although the University threshold for impaired fitness to
practise is high, academic judgements are set at School level and where necessary, the
School will influence the University in its application of the policy.

Actions
Req.
Actions
Number
2
The School should consider adopting the same form for
consent wherever the students are carrying out clinical
activity.
7

Due date
(if applicable)
n/a

i.

The School should clarify the criteria for the use of the
clinical alert button

n/a

ii.

The School should clarify the process to be followed in the
event of the clinical alert button being pressed and a ‘red
flag’ appearing on the student’s LIFTUPP records.

n/a

9

Standard 2 – Quality evaluation and review of the programme
The provider must have in place effective policy and procedures for the monitoring and
review of the programme
Requirements
Met
Partly Not
met
met
9. The provider will have a framework in place that details how it
manages the quality of the programme which includes

making appropriate changes to ensure the curriculum
continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and
adapts to changing legislation and external guidance. There
must be a clear statement about where responsibility lies for
this function



10. The provider will have systems in place to quality assure

placements
11. Any problems identified through the operation of the quality

management framework must be addressed as soon as
possible
12. Should quality evaluation of the programme identify any

serious threats to the students achieving learning outcomes
through the programme, the GDC must be notified at the
earliest possible opportunity







13. Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external

quality assurance procedures
14. External examiners must be utilised and must be familiar with

the learning outcomes and their context. Providers should
follow QAA guidelines on external examining where
applicable
15. Providers must consider and, where appropriate, act upon





concerns raised or formal reports on the quality of education
and assessment
GDC comments
Requirement 9: The provider will have a framework in place that details how it manages
the quality of the programme which includes making appropriate changes to ensure the
curriculum continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and adapts to
changing legislation and external guidance. There must be a clear statement about
where responsibility lies for this function (Requirement Met)
The Director of the BDS programme assumes ultimate responsibility for ensuring the quality of
the programme and this is achieved through the use of a clear and effective quality
management framework.
The BDS Curriculum Innovation Group (BDSCIG) is the key forum for the programme to be
scrutinised and developed. The BDSCIG, formerly known as the BDS Management Group
(BDSMG), meets three times per year. It is chaired by the Director of the programme and
attended by senior members of the School, student and NHS representatives and
administrative staff. Teaching leads in each of the key subject areas provide written reports
about individual courses, which are reviewed by the Committee. The panel was advised that
10

teaching leads hold regular meetings with the staff in their area to ensure that the views of the
wider team are represented. Student feedback on individual courses is also considered at this
forum. There is a proactive Staff Student Liaison Committee (SSLC) and those students that
the panel spoke to said that it worked well as a mechanism for raising, discussing and where
possible resolving issues. The minutes from the SSLC are also considered at the BDSCIG
meetings, as are external examiners’ reports. The inspectors reviewed minutes of BDSCIG
meetings and concluded that issues arising were generally acted on appropriately and
promptly.
The inspectors established that there is a clear line of reporting from the BDSCIG to the Board
of Studies (BOS), which reports to the Faculty Academic Quality Committee. This body in turn
reports to the University Academic Quality Committee.
In addition to these measures, every six years, the University conducts a Periodic Review of
the programme, during which the curriculum, learning environment, student support and
quality management are assessed.
Requirement 10: The provider will have systems in place to quality assure placements
(Requirement Not Met)
The material provided to the inspectors in advance of the inspection suggested that the School
assesses the suitability of individuals wishing to act as a tutor in an SDS or GDS placement
and a senior clinical tutor from the Dental School inspects the GDS outreach placements. It
also indicated that SDS and GDS tutors are required to attend an annual training session
aimed at achieving consistency of teaching and providing updates on the programme structure.
The pre-inspection material stated that an outreach co-ordinator visits outreach sites on a
‘rolling programme’ for the purposes of quality assurance and in addition, student and trainer
feedback on the placement is collected. There was little information provided about the quality
assurance activity undertaken within the hospital placements.
During the inspection, the panel were unable to discern how meaningful the role of the
outreach co-ordinator was or how engaged the outreach tutors were with the programme.
However, based on the pre-inspection material alone, the inspectors accepted there was likely
to be basic oversight and guidance provided to ensure that students’ clinical experience in the
GDS and SDS placements was appropriate and consistent. The inspectors were not confident
that the same could be said of the hospital placements. Monitoring of the placements at the
Alder Hey Children’s Hospital, the Royal Liverpool University Hospital and the University
Hospital Aintree appeared to be limited to feedback received from staff and students and the
inspectors were not convinced that this was collected and reviewed in a robust manner.
The School agreed that its quality assurance activity in outreach was limited and stated this
was because it did not feel that it could yet robustly assure the quality of student assessment
outside of the Dental School. The School suggested this was not in itself a problem, though, as
they informed inspectors that clinical activity in outreach did not contribute to decisions relating
to clinical competence. The inspection panel was advised that the sole purpose of the
placements was to increase student experience and to prepare students for foundation
training.
The inspectors were of the opinion that whilst the outreach placements were, according to the
School, used for experiential learning only, there does still need to be a level of educational
quality assurance in place in all placements to ensure the curriculum is being delivered to the
correct standard and by appropriate teachers. This was of particular importance given the
relatively high number of patients the students treated in outreach.
11

Although the School advised that clinical activity in outreach did not influence decisions relating
to the sign-up of students to the final examination, comments made to the inspectors by
students, as well as data provided by the School, suggested that clinical activity undertaken in
outreach placements may be considered as part of the summative review of clinical progress
at the CAP meetings. Specifically, students informed inspectors that clinical activity in outreach
could be used to “make up the numbers”. The absence of a quality assurance system to
standardise the assessment of students in outreach placements therefore took on greater
significance for the inspectors. The panel raised the issue with two of the external examiners
who also seemed to be unclear as to the status of clinical activity in outreach.
The inspectors considered that the lack of activity to quality assure student assessment within
outreach was of real concern given the apparent potential reliance on outreach activity to
determine student attainment of learning outcomes and it is for this reason that they
considered the Requirement fell below the category of Partly Met, which it would otherwise
have reached.
The School is strongly encouraged to reconsider its view on the quality assurance of outreach
placements and to clarify its approach to the use of clinical treatment data generated from
activity in outreach. The inspectors consider that it would be helpful if clinical activity in
outreach formally counted towards assessment decisions, a view which was shared by
students present during the inspection.
Requirement 11: Any problems identified through the operation of the quality
management framework must be addressed as soon as possible (Requirement Met)
The panel studied the minutes of a variety of BDSMG, BDSCIG and SSLC meetings, external
examiner reports and evidence of actions taken to address identified problems. Discussions
with two of the Final BDS external examiners supported the view of the inspectors, which was
that the School is responsive to issues being raised and takes action to address them in a
timely fashion.
Requirement 12: Should quality evaluation of the programme identify any serious
threats to the students achieving learning outcomes through the programme, the GDC
must be notified at the earliest possible opportunity (Requirement Met)
As noted in Requirements 9 and 11, the School has an effective quality management process
in place. Whilst there has not been a need to date for the GDC to be notified of serious threats
to students achieving learning outcomes, the inspectors felt confident that this course of action
would be taken should the need arise.

Requirement 13: Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external quality
assurance procedures (Requirement Partly Met)
Notwithstanding the findings in Requirement 10, the inspectors considered that there were
rigorous internal quality assurance procedures in place, as described in Requirements 9 and 11.
In terms of external quality assurance, the inspectors noted that external examiners were used
appropriately and that they were actively involved at various stages of the programme in areas
of relevance to their individual disciplines. Both examiners and inspectors felt that it would
benefit the programme if each external examiner received an overview of the entire programme
and processes used. It was also felt that the involvement of the same external examiner at both
CAP meetings, and ideally two examiners at each meeting, would enhance the rigour of the
12

student progression and sign-up process.

Requirement 14: External examiners must be utilised and must be familiar with the
learning outcomes and their context. Providers should follow Quality Assurance
Agency (QAA) guidelines on external examining where applicable (Requirement Met)
The programme specification clearly sets out the role of the external examiner and in addition
there is a comprehensive external examiner training interface on LIFTUPP.
The external examiners were familiar with the learning outcomes, although they did indicate
that they would prefer to see the learning outcomes mapped across all five years of the
programme when considering sign-up for the final examination rather than Years 4 and 5 only.
The inspectors noted that the external examiners did not examine in the final assessments,
and that the external examiner role was in accordance with current QAA guidelines.
Requirement 15: Providers must consider and, where appropriate, act upon concerns
raised or formal reports on the quality of education and assessment (Requirement Met)
As mentioned in Requirement 11, there was evidence in the BDSMG/BDSCIG minutes to
suggest that this requirement was being met.

Actions for the provider
Req.
Actions
Number
10
i.
The School must indicate how it proposes to quality
assure all outreach placements more rigorously (Also
action 13.i)

13

Due date
(if applicable)
March 2014

ii.

The School must provide a clear policy on the use of
March 2014
clinical activity data gained from outreach placements.
(Also action 16 i). If the policy states that these data
may influence decisions regarding a student’s ability to
sit a final examination, the quality assurance of the
assessment of students must be sufficiently robust and
a relevant policy relating to the quality assurance of
assessment in outreach placements must be produced.

i.

The School must indicate how it proposes to quality
assure all outreach placements more rigorously (Also
action 10.i)

ii.

The School should provide to each of the external
n/a
examiners an overview of the BDS programme,
including a mapping of the learning outcomes across all
five years

iii.

The School should consider using the same, and if
n/a
possible, two external examiners throughout the sign-up
process

March 2014

13

Standard 3– Student assessment
Assessment must be reliable and valid. The choice of assessment method must be
appropriate to demonstrate achievement of the GDC learning outcomes. Assessors
must be fit to perform the assessment task
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
16. To award the qualification, providers must be assured that
students have demonstrated attainment across the full

range of learning outcomes, at a level sufficient to indicate
they are safe to begin practice. This assurance should be
underpinned by a coherent approach to aggregation and
triangulation, as well as the principles of
assessment referred to in these standards.
17. The provider will have in place management systems to



plan, monitor and record the assessment of students
throughout the programme against each of the learning
outcomes
18. Assessment must involve a range of methods appropriate

to the learning outcomes and these should be in line with
current practice and routinely monitored, quality assured
and developed
19. Students will have exposure to an appropriate breadth of



patients/procedures and will undertake each activity
relating to patient care on sufficient occasions to enable
them to develop the skills and the level of competency to
achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes



20. The provider should seek to improve student performance



by encouraging reflection and by providing feedback1.
21. Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills,

experience and training to undertake the task of
assessment, appropriate general or specialist registration
with a regulatory body
22. Providers must ask external examiners to report on the

extent to which assessment processes are rigorous, set at
the correct standard, ensure equity of treatment for
students and have been fairly conducted
23. Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear







criteria. Standard setting must be employed for summative
assessments
24. Where appropriate, patient/peer/customer feedback



should contribute to the assessment process
25. Where possible, multiple samples of performance

must be taken to ensure the validity and reliability of
the assessment conclusion
1



Reflective practice should not be part of the assessment process in a way that risks effective student use

14

26. The standard expected of students in each area to be

assessed must be clear and students and staff
involved in assessment must be aware of this
standard



GDC comments
Requirement 16: To award the qualification, providers must be assured that students
have demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes, at a level
sufficient to indicate they are safe to begin practice. This assurance should be
underpinned by a coherent approach to aggregation and triangulation, as well as the
principles of assessment referred to in these standards. (Requirement Partly Met)
The inspection panel was advised that the mapping of the BDS qualification to the
programme and GDC learning outcomes is achieved electronically via LIFTUPP. Preinspection documentation indicated that outcomes are entered into the core LIFTUPP
database and linked to each relevant element of the programme both in terms of delivery
and assessment. Whilst there may have been evidence available to demonstrate this
feature of LIFTUPP, the inspectors did not see it during the course of the inspection.
The inspectors were, however, assured of the learning outcome coverage as they received
a detailed paper-based mapping of the programme against the GDC learning outcomes.
The GDC document entitled ‘BDS Inspection Round 2012-2014 Pre-Inspection Document :
Annex Two’, requested information on how and when each of the learning outcomes in The
First Five Years was assessed during the BDS programme. This document suggested that
every learning outcome was assessed by a number of different assessment methods and
across more than one year of study. Many of the learning outcomes are assessed across
most or all of the years of study when clinical activity is undertaken (Years 2-5). The panel
was also provided with a document that provided a detailed breakdown of the mapping of
the Year 5 assessments to the GDC learning outcomes.
There are two panels which meet during the years of clinical activity (Years 2-5) and their
purpose is to review students’ progress towards attaining the programme learning
outcomes. The Clinical Development Monitoring Panel (CDMP) meets in the first two terms
of Years 2-4 and in the first term of Year 5. This panel is formative and feedback is provided
to help students focus on particular areas requiring attention. Students are held back from
clinical activity by this panel, if necessary, and they are provided with targeted training
before being allowed to continue. The Clinical Advisory Panel (CAP) meets in the final term
of each year and it is a summative review of students’ clinical skills. This summative review
must be passed for a student to be allowed to sit the end of year examination. Students
must pass each year of the programme in order to progress to the following year.
According to the Year 5 Assessment Handbook, the final year CAP reviews a number of
different assessments and on the basis of this, makes a decision about whether students
are clinically ready to enter the final examination. In addition to the continuous work-based
assessment recorded on LIFTUPP, the handbook states that the CAP will review
handbooks in four different disciplines, an outreach CDS report, an orthodontic new patient
report, two restorative case reports and one periodontics case report.
The inspectors attended two final year CAP meetings and observed that the clinical data
that were reviewed by the CAP were a broad summary of students’ competence in different
disciplines. At the time of the inspection, there did not appear to be the facility on LIFTUPP
to provide a detailed overview of each student’s activity across patient case-mix and
15

different treatment procedures. To access this information it was necessary to view
individual student records. The panel understands that LIFTUPP is being developed to
provide this type of summary in future. The inspectors were informed that progression
decisions were made at a subject level by teaching leads and their clinical colleagues. It
was not entirely clear how these decisions were arrived at and the inspectors assumed that
the teaching leads cross-referenced individual student’s data on LIFTUPP with the sign-up
criteria in the handbook.
As alluded to under Requirement 10, the inspectors found evidence to suggest that
paediatric treatments provided at Alder Hey Hospital were included in the longitudinal
assessment data used by the CAP to determine suitability to progress to the final
examination. Some of the students the inspectors spoke with also indicated that restorative
treatments provided in outreach placements may be included in assessment data. This
came as a surprise because the School had previously indicated that clinical activity
undertaken in outreach was for experiential learning and the assessment of it could not be
robustly quality assured. The inspectors were advised that Dental School staff (known as inreach staff) were present at Alder Hey Children’s Hospital on a part-time basis but it was
unclear whether students were also assessed and supervised by non-Dental School staff
during their treatment of paediatric patients at that location.
As mentioned above, the School held two CAP meetings and those students with
deficiencies identified in the first CAP meeting were reviewed in the second meeting. All
were found competent to sit the final examination. It became apparent that some of those
students who appeared to be in need of fairly intensive additional training at the first CAP
meeting, were actually in the process of undertaking clinical procedures which were not
reflected at that time on LIFTUPP. The inspectors agreed that it is important for ‘real time’
data to be available for consideration at CAP meetings and understood that the School
intends to remedy this as soon as possible.
It was mentioned by a subject lead during the second CAP meeting that one student was
yet to meet the necessary orthodontic pre-requisites, however the CAP seemed willing to
allow the student to progress to the final examination on the assumption that the work would
be carried out between the CAP meeting and the examination. There was no apparent
minute of this decision and no requirement for the paperwork relating to the outstanding
activity to be forwarded to CAP members once it had been completed. It was not clear as to
the impact of not completing the pre-requisites on the final sign-up process and the School
is encouraged to tighten up its management of a situation such as this.
The panel felt that some of the pre-requisites for passing the CAP review, stated in the Year
5 Assessment Handbook, appeared to be aspirational. For example, 14 orthodontic
procedures are listed but only six or seven procedures, including some of the fundamental
procedures, needed to be carried out.
There appeared to be a number of in-course assessments which were not considered by
the Year 5 CAP, despite the fact that the Year 5 Assessment Handbook indicated that they
would be. The CAP meetings observed by the inspection panel limited their review to the
continuous assessment results and data held on LIFTUPP. The School informed the
inspectors that a sample of the other in-course assessments was reviewed by external
examiners, however it was not clear how or if the marks from these pieces of work fed in to
the CAP discussions. The panel felt that the School correctly attached significant
importance to the data stored in LIFTUPP relating to continuous assessment however it was
unclear what part the other in-course assessments played in the sign-up process, at what
stage they were considered and by whom.
The inspectors recommend that a clear set of sign-up criteria would assist students and
16

ensure a completely equitable approach. At present the Assessment Handbook does not
reflect the fact that there are two CAP meetings and the panel felt this ought to be made
clear.
The panel considered the factors which underpinned the School’s assurance that students
demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes. They concluded that
the assessments they saw were valid, reliable and reproducible. Assessment is discussed
in more detail in Requirements 18, 23 and 25.
In terms of the School’s approach to the triangulation of assessment results, the inspectors
felt that LIFTUPP enabled the user to cross-reference the results of every continuous
assessment of a student’s clinical activity. Continuous assessments appeared to be carried
out by a number of different assessors on different occasions and an overall picture of a
student’s clinical ability in any defined area or procedure type was obtained. The inspectors
considered this to be a positive feature of LIFTUPP.
It was less clear to the panel, however, how the School triangulated the results of the
continuous assessment recorded on LIFTUPP with other in-course assessments which
were not recorded on LIFTUPP. It may well be that this does happen but the panel did not
see evidence of it.
The approach to the aggregation of end of year assessments is set out in the Programme
Specification and the Assessment Handbooks for each of the years of study and the
scheme for arriving at a pass mark for each year was clear.
The Examination Board meeting was the final opportunity for the School to assure itself that
the students had attained the range of learning outcomes and the inspectors considered the
process by which the pass marks for the OSCE and written paper were achieved was
extremely thorough and reliable. An external examiner was present at both the final year
CAP meetings and Examination Board meeting to validate the processes.
Requirement 17: The provider will have in place management systems to plan,
monitor and record the assessment of students throughout the programme against
each of the learning outcomes (Requirement Partly Met)
As mentioned in Requirement 16, the School provided a detailed mapping of the
assessments within the programme to the learning outcomes contained within the GDC
document The First Five Years.
The integration of the four–year graduate pathway appeared to be very well managed with
students on this course following a Special Dental Component a few weeks before the start
of Year 2, which enabled them to catch up on practical skills. There is also additional
academic work throughout Year 2. The students on the four-year graduate pathway
commence Year 3 with the same skill set and knowledge as the undergraduate students.
The panel concluded that LIFTUPP was working well as a means by which to monitor and
record the continuous assessment of students’ clinical activity and noted that students
expressed their satisfaction with the system. LIFTUPP provides assessment data from a
number of different assessors on multiple occasions and this generates a reliable picture of
a student’s ability and skill-set. It also readily identifies areas where a student is need of
development and when they are ready for assessment.
At the time of the inspection, LIFTUPP had not been completely populated with clinical
data. The inspection panel recognised that this was due to the newness of the system,
17

which had not yet been integrated across every discipline. The panel was told that this
would be rectified for the next cohort of students. In the interim, marks allocated to
orthodontic procedures known as the ‘LOCEPs’ were recorded on a paper spreadsheet in
hard copy
Although the panel was not able to see how the clinical data on LIFTUPP correlated with
learning outcomes per se, given that nearly every learning outcome was being continuously
assessed (albeit from a clinical as opposed to knowledge-based perspective), the panel felt
that once fully populated, LIFTUPP data would give an overview of a student’s continuous
assessment and progress against most learning outcomes.
In addition to the regular monitoring through the LIFTUPP system, clinical data and levels of
student exposure to a variety of procedures and patient types were also reviewed by
teaching leads and at the CDMP and CAP meetings. The inspectors were impressed that
monitoring of case-mix and case numbers via LIFTUPP is undertaken on a monthly basis by
a clinical co-ordinator in respect of restorative procedures undertaken within the Dental
School. The inspectors assumed that teaching leads review students’ completion of other
treatment types but there did not appear to be a clearly defined approach as to how
frequently this occurred or whether it included treatments undertaken in outreach. The
CDMP and CAP reviewed longitudinal data and assisted in the planning of assessments for
students who had a shortfall in experience. The inspectors were informed that in the event
of deficiencies, an action plan was devised and the student was provided with the additional
support where necessary.
As far as the panel could see, the data stored on LIFTUPP related only to the continuous
assessment element of the programme. The inspectors found no evidence of the marks for
the other in-course assessments, such as the case reports, handbooks, and portfolios. It
was not clear where the marks for these pieces of work were recorded and held. The
external examiners said they had sight of some of the case reports and portfolios but it was
not clear who monitored them within the School and determined how satisfactorily or
otherwise they had been completed. The inspectors were also unclear where the results
relating to assessments from the previous years of study were recorded. It is for these
reasons that the inspectors found this Requirement to be partly met but the programme is
well-placed in this area and this Requirement should not be difficult for the School to meet
in the future.
Requirement 18: Assessment must involve a range of methods appropriate to the
learning outcomes and these should be in line with current practice and routinely
monitored, quality assured and developed (Requirement Met)
As described above, a central method for assessing clinical skills at Liverpool is continuous
work-based assessment. The Dental School staff all seemed to be well versed in the use of
LIFTUPP for recording their assessment of students’ performance. The assessment data
on LIFTUPP visibly identifies outlying assessors and thus acts as a means by which the
School can continuously calibrate and standardise the assessment decisions made by
individuals. The marking scheme of 1-6 is supported by clear descriptors for each year
group and these descriptors can be re-defined, if necessary, to ensure equitable marking.
In this way, LIFTUPP acts a reliable and transparent means of recording and quality
assuring the assessment of students’ clinical activity within the Dental Hospital.
As already mentioned, the panel found evidence to suggest that some activity in outreach
was also used to determine students’ clinical competence. The assessment of students in
outreach was not recorded on LIFTUPP and, as indicated in Requirement 10, it was not
clear whether any measures were taken to ensure the standardised assessment of
18

students in outreach.
In addition to the continuous assessment, the testing of clinical skills also takes place via
the initial operative skills examinations (referred to in Requirement 1): Directly Observed
Procedures (DOPs) and OSCE examinations. The panel was a little surprised that the final
year OSCE examination contained a relatively high percentage of knowledge—based
stations. However, the panel considered that the delivery, organisation and quality
assurance of the OSCE examinations was exemplary. Whilst the inspectors did not closely
scrutinise the DOPs and pre-clinical tests, based on the documentary evidence provided
they felt confident that these would be as equally well managed as the OSCEs.
Knowledge-based assessments included written papers containing extended matching
items (EMIs), single best answer questions (SBAs) and short answer questions (SAQs).
The inspectors sampled these types of assessments and found them to be well constructed
and fair. There was a critical writing component in Year 3, which is assessed via an essay
and presentation.
The Year 5 Assessment Handbook indicated that students were required to complete a
number of handbooks (general anaesthesia observation sessions, maxillofacial surgery,
medical accident and emergencies, oral pathology) two restorative and one periodontic
case report, an outreach CDS report and an orthodontic new patient report. The panel had
sight of a few of these assessments but they did not see the marks allocated or the marking
system and therefore could not ascertain the importance of these assessments in the
overall progress and sign up process. It was clear, however, from the case reports seen by
the panel that the standard of work was high.

Requirement 19: Students will have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and will undertake each activity relating to patient care on
sufficient occasions to enable them to develop the skills and the level of
competency to achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes (Requirement Met)
The students that the inspectors spoke to said they liked the structure of the programme in
so far as it enabled them to access patients in Year 2, after the Clinical Readiness
Examination, with the complexity and breadth of treatments increasing throughout the
programme. Students are exposed to patients at the Dental School via the Prevention,
Assessment, Treatment Planning and Restorative Consultation Clinics. The School has
successfully developed initiatives to increase the number of patients going to the Treatment
Planning Clinic via referrals from consultant clinics, local GDS and Community Services. As
already mentioned, students also attend a variety of clinical settings in both primary and
secondary settings outside of the Dental School.
The inspectors recognise that students have access to a range of patients/ procedures over
the course of the programme however they did not find it particularly easy to form a view on
this requirement. This was due to the absence of a sufficiently detailed summary of clinical
activity for the year group and a lack of clarity on the School’s approach to determining
when a student was clinically ready to sit the final examination. Having sampled a number
of individual students’ data on LIFTUPP, the panel concluded that it was likely that all final
year students had treated a broad range of patients and were able to undertake the
requisite procedure types on sufficient occasions to develop the necessary skills and
abilities to meet the learning outcomes. However, the inspectors determined that students’
exposure to an appropriate breadth of patients and procedures was facilitated by
attendance at a number of outreach placements. It is essential that this element of the
programme is quality assured to a high standard if reliance on outreach data as part of the
sign-up process is planned for future cohorts.
19

Requirement 20: The provider should seek to improve student performance by
encouraging reflection and by providing feedback2 (Requirement Met)
The School indicated in the pre-inspection material that case reports, reflective logs and
insight forms make provision for students to self-reflect and in addition, students reflect
when discussing their progress with tutors.
The panel found evidence of student self-reflection within the case reports. Inspectors also
noted from discussions with students that they are actively encouraged to reflect on their
own performance. Students indicated that they have to complete insight forms although the
panel did not see any completed versions of these. Inspectors also noted that students
complete a self-evaluation log book as part of the ‘Introduction to Clinical Practice’ course,
which takes place in Year 2. The School advised that reflective logs are in the process of
being incorporated into LIFTUPP but it was unclear whether a paper version was being
used in the interim.
Whilst it was evident that students were being encouraged to self-reflect, it was not clear
how this self-reflection was assessed and how it contributed to progression within the
programme, which was stated by the School in the pre-inspection material.
Students were positive about the feedback they received on their clinical activity. They
advised the inspectors that they received verbal feedback on clinic and some written
feedback was provided through LIFTUPP. Inspectors noted that written feedback seemed
to be provided in the event of under-performance only and they felt it would be useful if the
School could provide written feedback across the range of performances. Students
received feedback from tutors whilst developing their own personal development plans. The
inspectors noted that feedback is also provided to the students after the formative review of
their clinical progress in the CDMP meetings.
Requirement 21: Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills, experience and
training to undertake the task of assessment, appropriate general or specialist
registration with a regulatory body (Requirement Met)
All members of teaching clinical staff in the Dental School have GDC registration and the
School undertakes an annual training day for all staff which includes a focus on
assessment. The inspectors were satisfied that external examiners were appropriately
qualified.
There is a staff and external examiner training resource on LIFTUPP and those questioned
understood how LIFTUPP was being used for the assessment of students’ clinical activity.
In terms of the final year OSCE, examiners were provided with a thorough briefing and a
robust calibration exercise took place in advance of the examination.

2

Reflective practice should not be part of the assessment process in a way that risks effective student use

20

Requirement 22: Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent to
which assessment processes are rigorous, set at the correct standard, ensure equity
of treatment for students and have been fairly conducted (Requirement Met)
The Dental School follows the University policy on the use of external examiners and it was
clear that the external examiners reported on assessment processes in a detailed and
constructive manner.

Requirement 23: Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear criteria.
Standard setting must be employed for summative assessments (Requirement Met)
The clinical longitudinal assessment on LIFTUPP is criterion referenced. The marking
system involves the use of marks on a 1-6 scale and there are clear marking descriptors
which are related to the standard expected of each year group. A 1 or 2 signifies the
student is under-performing, a 3 or 4 suggests the student is of the standard expected and
5 or 6 suggests they are above standard. For the final year students, the expected
standard is that of a ‘safe beginner’. The panel felt that the standards set for each year
group were appropriate.
Staff and students the panel spoke to were all familiar with the marking criteria and
generally it was felt there was consistency in the use of the marking scheme by
supervisors. Students reported though that the grades awarded by part-time and sessional
tutors tended to be lower than their full time counterparts. The students were, however,
aware that any discrepancies in marking were carefully reviewed. The School seeks to
achieve the calibration of assessors via feedback and from the multiple assessment data on
LIFTUPP. The data recorded about students over a number of different treatments and
occasions should identify assessors who are marking too harshly or leniently and this can
then be rectified through targeted training or the redefining of descriptors.
The School advised that in respect of written paper assessments, peer review, standard
setting and post assessment appraisal takes place. The panel reviewed a sample of written
assessments and they considered that these assessments were fair, valid and reliable. The
standard setting, calibration of assessors and manner in which the pass mark was
established in respect of the final OSCE was excellent.
The inspectors could not establish how the case reports, handbooks and portfolios were
assessed and could not therefore conclude whether these were marked against clear
criteria.

Requirement 24: Where appropriate, patient/peer/customer feedback should
contribute to the assessment process (Requirement Not Met)
The School stated that they had attempted to gain patient feedback in the past but that they
had found it difficult to gather meaningful data. As a result, they would like to use NHS
forms in future, which will enable them to gather information about experience and quality of
treatment. Minutes of management meetings suggested this issue had been under
discussion for some time and the panel encourages the School to take this forward so that
patient feedback can be obtained and incorporated into the assessment process at the
earliest opportunity.
The inspectors noted that a very small amount of ‘patient’ feedback obtained via actors in
the OSCEs contributes to the assessment process.
21

Limited peer to peer feedback is provided in the first year ‘Problem Based Learning’
modules. The panel was informed that during students’ clinical training, dental technicians
review the quality of instructions to the dental laboratory and dental nurses also provide
feedback. It was not clear how formalised this feedback was and if it was used in student
assessment.
The panel could not identify that the School was acting on or triangulating the feedback
received from the peer groups as part of student assessment and in light of the very limited
amount of patient feedback used in the assessment process, they considered this
Requirement to be not met.
Requirement 25: Where possible, multiple samples of performance must be taken to
ensure the validity and reliability of the assessment conclusion (Requirement Met)
A range of assessments is used to assess students against the learning outcomes on
multiple occasions. The mapping of assessments to the GDC learning outcomes provided
by the School prior to the inspection provided evidence of this.
In addition, the use of LIFTUPP provides triangulated data regarding students’ continuous
clinical activity. Core skills are clearly assessed on many occasions and multiple assessors
aid assessment, particularly on subjects such as professionalism, where subjective
evaluations are made.
Requirement 26: The standard expected of students in each area to be assessed
must be clear and students and staff involved in assessment must be aware of this
standard (Requirement Partly Met)
The assessment handbook for each year of study and the LIFTUPP interfaces for students,
staff and external examiners provide information about assessments and the marking
criteria for the longitudinal continuous assessment.
The assessments listed in the handbooks appear to be comprehensive but the panel noted
that a number of the orthodontic procedures named are aspirational. It was also unclear how
the case reports, portfolios and handbooks would be assessed and against which standard.
The inspectors considered that the School should clarify the approach to assessing these
pieces of work as it would seem inappropriate if the students spend considerable time
completing them when their contribution to assessment is limited or non-existent.

Actions for the Provider
Req.
Actions
Number
16
i.
The School must provide a clear policy on the use of
clinical activity data gained from outreach placements
(Also action 10.ii)

ii.

The School must ensure that decisions on progression
are made in accordance with its own policy regarding
the use of data for students’ clinical activity undertaken
at different locations.

Due date
(if applicable)
March 2014

Update to
be provided
through
2014 GDC
Annual
22

Monitoring
exercise
iii.

The School must ensure that the assessments
considered by the CAP correlate with sign-up criteria in
the Assessment Handbook

March 2014

iv.

The School must ensure that its policy regarding CAP
Update to be
decision-making accounts for situations where a student provided
has not quite completed the required sign-up clinical
through 2014
activity
GDC Annual
Monitoring
exercise

v.

The School must clarify how and when the in-course
assessments other than the continuous work-based
assessments are considered by CAP and how the
marks from these pieces of work are triangulated
against other marks

vi.

The School should ensure the Assessment Handbook is n/a
up to do date and contains clearly defined sign-up
criteria and information regarding the number of CAP
meetings

vii.

The School should clarify how clinical activity
undertaken after the second CAP meeting is recorded
and reviewed, if that activity counts towards the
progression decision

n/a

viii.

The School should consider introducing a system
whereby the discussions held by subject level tutors, in
preparation for the CAP meeting, are recorded.

n/a

ix.

The School should progress with its plans to ensure
‘real time’ data are available for consideration at CDMP
and CAP meetings

n/a

x.

The School should consider using the same external
examiner(s) at both of the CAP meetings.

n/a

17

The School must ensure that all assessments on the
programme are monitored and that the results are
centrally recorded.

Update to
be provided
through
2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

18

The School should consider the importance and relative n/a
contribution of each in-course assessment to the
determination of competence, particularly given the

Update to be
provided
through 2014
GDC Annual
Monitoring
exercise

23

considerable effort put into these assessments by the
students.
19

20

The School should progress with its plans to generate
an overview data profile of students against all prerequisites to sign-up

n/a

i.

The School should clarify how self-reflection in case
reports, reflective logs and insight forms are assessed
and used to influence progression through the
programme.

n/a

ii.

The School should provide written feedback to students n/a
covering a range of performances

23

24

The School should clarify how the case reports,
portfolios and handbooks are assessed

n/a

i.

The School must confirm how they will gather patient
feedback and how this will contribute to student
assessment

March 2014

ii.

The School must develop a mechanism which enables
peer feedback to contribute to student assessment,
where appropriate

Update to
be provided
through
2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

iii.

The School should make greater use of patient/actor
feedback on a day-to-day basis and in the OSCEs

n/a

26

The School must ensure that the standard expected of
students is clear. Students must be informed of the
impact/weighting of the in-course assessments and the
level of contribution to the sign-up process.

March 2014

24

Standard 4 – Equality and diversity
The provider must comply with equal opportunities and discrimination legislation and
practice. They must also advocate this practice to students
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
27. Providers must adhere to current legislation and best practice

guidance relating to equality and diversity



28. Staff will receive training on equality and diversity,



development and appraisal mechanisms will include this
29. Providers will convey to students the importance of

compliance with equality and diversity law and principles both
during training and after they begin practice



GDC comments
Requirement 27: Providers must adhere to current legislation and best practice
guidance relating to equality and diversity (Requirement Met)
The University fulfils its obligations under the Equality Act 2010 and delegates compliance with
it to the Head of School. The University and NHS Trust have relevant policies, to which the
School must adhere.

Requirement 28: Staff will receive training on equality and diversity, development and
appraisal mechanisms will include this (Requirement Partly Met)
There is mandatory training for staff holding consultancy positions. The panel was informed
that by Easter 2013, all Dental School staff who were due training would have received it. The
training may have occurred by the conclusion of the inspection, but the inspectors were not
provided with any evidence to demonstrate this.
Requirement 29: Providers will convey to students the importance of compliance with
equality and diversity law and principles of the four UK Nations both during training
and after they begin practice (Requirement Met)
This is conveyed to students across all years via the Annual Student Agreement, which
students are required to sign annually and which includes a requirement to comply with
Equality and Diversity law. In addition, there is an Equality and Diversity course in the third
year. Inspectors were advised that this subject is central to the community placements which
students undertake in Year 1 and within the Problem Based Learning Module in Year 2.

Actions for the Provider
Req.
Actions
Number
28
The School must evidence that the all university staff
have received training on Equality and Diversity

Due Date
(if applicable)
March 2014

25

Summary of Actions

No

Action

Observations

Due date

Response from Provider
2

7

The School should consider adopting the same
form for consent wherever the students are
carrying out clinical activity.

Use of the same form for consent for student activity
will be considered by the School Board of Studies.

n/a

i.

The School should clarify the criteria for the use
of the clinical alert button

i) The School will clarify this for staff at its annual
review day and in future documentation.

n/a

ii.

The School should clarify the process to be
followed in the event of the clinical alert button
being pressed and a ‘red flag’ appearing on the
student’s LIFTUPP records

ii) Upon submission, the system emails the
Assistant Head of School that an alert has been
submitted and they are able to review the
generated report. If that report indicates that
further action is needed then the Assistant
Head of School interviews the student and an
action plan is put in place. LIFTUPP displays all
issued alerts to the clinical panels, as observed
by the inspectors. Normally each individual alert
has already been managed, however, if the
panel sees the triangulation of multiple alerts
then it may decide that further action over
progression is needed. The School would have
been happy to clarify this process during the
inspection.

n/a

26

10

i.

The School must indicate how it proposes to
quality assure all outreach placements more
rigorously (Also action 13.i)

i) The School recognises that quality assurance
of Outreach (which makes up approximately 5%
of the total of time spent on clinical placements)
is extremely important and has mechanisms in
place that differ according to the differing
natures of the School’s placements. We will
endeavour to ensure that these processes are
continuously improved using the School and
Faculty QA procedures. However, the School
did not “..recognise that its quality assurance of
outreach was below the expected standard..” as
stated within the report. We would note that our
outreach quality assurance arrangements are a
commonly occurring model used by many
Dental Schools, some of which have been
praised over their use of the same model in the
current inspection round.

March 2014

ii.

The School must provide a clear policy on the use
of clinical activity data gained from outreach
placements. (Also action 16 i). If the policy states
that these data may influence decisions regarding
a student’s ability to sit a final examination, the
quality assurance of the assessment of students
must be sufficiently robust and a relevant policy
relating to the quality assurance of assessment in
outreach placements must be produced.

ii) The School would like to reiterate that its stated
policy is not to use outreach data to determine
student attainment and this is stated clearly to
our students. However we accept that there may
be confusion relating to Alder-Hey data alone.
Thus the School will redesignate Alder-Hey
Paediatric care as ‘in-reach’ (given the common
staffing and assessment processes in each site)
to ensure that it is very clear to all that outreach
clinical experience is not included in decisions
contributing to progression to the Finals
examination. The School would like to reassure
the GDC that the statement within the report,
that poor quality assured data was used to make
progression decisions, is incorrect.

March 2014

27

13

16

i.

The School must indicate how it proposes to
quality assure all outreach placements more
rigorously (Also action 10.i)

i) The School is reviewing the role of each of the
outreach placements and the associated quality
assurance procedures (please see response to
10. i).

March 2014

ii.

The School should provide to each of the external
examiners an overview of the BDS programme,
including a mapping of the learning outcomes
across all five years

ii) The entire programme information, including
mapping of the curriculum, is made available to
the external examiners on appointment, within
the external examiner interface - to which the
inspectors had full access. All the relevant
documentation is present, along with detailed
videos describing processes.

n/a

iii.

The School should consider using the same and, if
possible, two external examiners throughout the
sign-up process

iii) The School is happy to consider this for future
examinations and we are grateful for the
inspectors’ recommendation. However, we
consider this to be a surprising action point
given that a statement regarding a
recommended number of external examiners
does not appear within The First Five years,
Standards for Education or Preparing for
Practice. Neither was this identified as an issue
within the University’s Periodic Review in 2011.

n/a

i.

The School must provide a clear policy on the use
of clinical activity data gained from outreach
placements (Also action 10.ii)

i) Our policy, which we hoped had been stated
clearly previously, is that outreach data (other
than that gained at Alder-Hey) will not be
included in making progression decisions. To
improve clarity in the use of Alder-Hey
placement data, as noted earlier, this will be
redesignated as ‘in-reach’, alongside the Dental
Hospital placement data (see response 10.ii).

March 2014

28

ii.

The School must ensure that decisions on
progression are made in accordance with its own
policy regarding the use of data for students’
clinical activity undertaken at different locations.

ii) This is already the case and the School will
continue to ensure that this is followed.

Update to be
provided
through 2014
GDC Annual
Monitoring
exercise

iii.

The School must ensure that the assessments
considered by the CAP correlate with signup
criteria in the Assessment Handbook

iii) The School would like to take this opportunity to
reassure the GDC that this is already carried
out and is consistent with documentation that
was made available to the inspectors.

March 2014

iv.

The School must ensure that its policy regarding
CAP decision-making accounts for situations
where a student has not quite completed the
required sign-up clinical activity

iv) The School would also like to reassure the
GDC that it already follows its policy as outlined
within the 5th BDS Handbook: “The panel uses
the developmental pattern of the learner to
make a longitudinal judgement over the quality
and consistency of the domains, against the
expected standards achieved at the end of the
final year of study”.

Update to be
provided through
2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

v.

The School must clarify how and when the incourse assessments other than the continuous
work-based assessments are considered by CAP
and how the marks from these pieces of work are
triangulated against other marks

v) The School will be happy to clarify how these
assessments are considered by CDMP and
CAP.

Update to be
provided through
2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

vi.

The School should ensure the Assessment
Handbook is up to do date and contains clearly

vi) The School reviews and updates its
Assessment Handbooks on an annual basis.

n/a

29

defined sign-up criteria and information regarding
the number of CAP meetings

17

This includes reviewing progression criteria and
updated timetables of CDMP/CAP meetings.

vii.

The School should clarify how clinical activity
undertaken after the second CAP meeting is
recorded and reviewed, if that activity counts
towards the progression decision

vii)This will be clarified in future Assessment
Handbooks.

n/a

viii.

The School should consider introducing a system
whereby the discussions held by subject level
tutors preparation for the CAP meeting, are
recorded.

viii) We would reassure the GDC that these
systems already exist within the, termly, CDMP
processes and are recorded within the School
documentation as required by the University.

n/a

ix.

The School should progress with its plans to
ensure ‘real time’ data are available for
consideration at CDMP and CAP meetings

ix) This plan has been progressed.

n/a

x.

The School should consider using the same
external examiner(s) at both of the CAP meetings.

x) This suggestion will be adopted at the next
relevant diet, dependent upon external
examiner availability.

n/a

The School must ensure that all assessments on
the programme are monitored and that the results
are centrally recorded.

We would like to reassure the GDC that this is
already the case, as required by the University,
and all marks, not currently handled by LIFTUPP,
are stored on the departmental K: drive in a
structured manner.
We are sorry that this was not made clear to the
inspectors however their meetings tended to focus
on clinical monitoring. Although we made the point
repeatedly that other methods of assessment were
used throughout the programme, we did not
receive any requests to show records from all

Update to be
provided
through 2014
GDC Annual
Monitoring
exercise

30

assessments. Therefore we assumed that the
inspectors were satisfied with the University
processes as considered in our 2011 University
Periodic Review, which had been made available
to the inspectors.
18

The School should consider the importance and
relative contribution of each in-course assessment
to the determination of competence, particularly
given the considerable effort put into these
assessments by the students.

This will be considered by the School Board of
Studies.

n/a

19

The School should progress with its plans to
generate an overview data profile of students
against all pre-requisites to sign-up

These plans are progressing well.

n/a

i.

The School should clarify how self-reflection in
case reports, reflective logs and Insight forms are
assessed and used to influence progression
throughout the course.

i) This will be reinforced to staff and students. The
School would have been happy to clarify this to
the inspectors at the time of the inspection but did
not receive a request to do so. The Introduction
to Clinical Practice has self reflection components
embedded within it which are considered as part
of the progression to the CRE, an exam that the
inspectors have commended. Insight is part of
the professionalism domain and is recorded
within LIFTUPP along with self-reflection skills.
Professionalism data is considered by CAP. All
clinical case reports have a reflective section that
must be completed satisfactorily for the overall
case report to be considered satisfactory.

n/a

ii.

The School should provide written feedback to
students covering a range of performances

ii) Whilst a considerable amount of feedback is
already provided, mechanisms are in place to
increase this.

n/a

20

31

23

24

The School should clarify how the case reports,
portfolios and handbooks are assessed

Criterion referencing, that was made available to
the inspectors, is used. However, the School will
clarify this further to students within their annual,
in-year, induction processes.
i) The School already uses systems embedded
within LIFTUPP to do this but is expanding this
further using (trial) forms of ‘PREMS’ (Patient
Related Experience Measures) that will feed
into the School’s Clinical Development
Monitoring Panel (CDMP).

n/a

Update to be
provided
through 2014
GDC Annual
Monitoring
exercise

i.

The School must confirm how they will gather
patient feedback and how these will contribute to
student assessment

ii.

The School must develop a mechanism which
enables peer feedback to contribute to student
assessment, where appropriate

ii) The School is investigating where this can be
incorporated most appropriately into the
programme.

iii.

The School should make greater use of
patient/actor feedback on a day to day basis and in
the OSCEs

iii) The School is investigating methods by which
this feedback can be captured

26

The School must ensure that the standard
expected of students is clear. Students must be
informed of the impact/weighting of the in-course
assessments and the level of contribution to the
sign-up process.

The School provides clear standards for each year
cohort within their relevant Assessment Handbook
but will label these more explicitly in future.

28

The School must evidence that the all university
staff have received training on Equality and
Diversity

The School holds a database showing 100%
compliance with this requirement.

March 2014

n/a
March 2014

March 2014

32

Observations from the provider on content of report
Provider to record additional observations here

We are grateful that the inspection was carried out courteously, and in a way that interfered as little as reasonably possible with the function of
the School and associated Dental Hospital. The School is also grateful for the opportunity to comment on the inspection report.
With reference to requirements which are ‘partly met’ or ‘not met’, a number of themes appear to emerge from the report. These tend to be
arranged around: Requirements to progress to Finals, Outreach, and mapping of our curriculum.
 In the consideration of progression to Finals, the School is disappointed that the inspectors make a number of points where they did not
always seek available information. Furthermore, some criticism of processes occurs where the School has ample evidence that a policy
is in place, and adhered to. We feel that, often, evidence was not requested or available evidence appears not to have been considered
fully by the inspectors. On a number of occasions during the inspection process we highlighted the need for assessment of quality as
well as considering quantity in student progression decisions. Therefore the School does not use numerical requirements but instead
applies academic judgement to a body of available evidence including quantity, quality and consistency. Whilst this is less easy for an
outside organisation to measure in an inspection, the School considers that a more holistic view, based on a wide range of data,
provides better protection for the public.
 With respect to Outreach there is not a standardised system of its use in Schools in the UK and the definition and use of Outreach
varies between institutions. In Liverpool there appears to have been confusion regarding the utilisation of Outreach by the School for
which we apologise. We did try to clarify things on a number of occasions but appear to have been unsuccessful in this. There also
appears to be some confusion within the student body that the School has tried to address previously, but this does not appear to have
been yet wholly successful. The confusion arises because activity in one area (Paediatric Dentistry at Alder-Hey Hospital) is supervised
and assessed by the same paediatric staff, from the Dental School, who also work at Alder-Hey. This data alone is therefore considered
in progression decisions, as we feel it is ‘off-site’ or ‘extended learning’ rather than Outreach. In all other situations we define Outreach
as a means of solely gaining experiential learning and data from this experience (although recorded for postgraduation portfolio
purposes) is not used in progression decisions. Outreach and inreach data was amalgamated for the inspectors’ use at their request,
which may have led to some confusion within the inspection team regarding the use of the data, but it is not used in this combined form
by the School.
 The BDS programme is mapped fully and Annex 2 and the BDS programme specification, provided in the pre-inspection
documentation, demonstrate where each outcome is assessed. Furthermore, it is the core mapping in LIFTUPP that enabled the
production of the detailed finals exam blueprints, and enables all of the incoming data from the clinics to be sorted into domains within
the LIFTUPP interface. Annex 2 was also generated as an output from the core database that lies behind the LIFTUPP interface. It
would have been counter intuitive to have a well mapped curriculum and then not utilise this in the LIFTUPP system that the School
devised to track its students’ progress. However, at no point during the inspection was the School asked to demonstrate item-for-item
mapping or to explicitly demonstrate the mapping behind LIFTUPP. The School would have provided the information if requested but,
as no request was received, it is surprising that mapping is seen as a potential shortcoming in the School’s processes.
33

The School is very pleased that the Liverpool University BDS programme was found to remain sufficient for registration as a dentist and we are
also grateful for the many positive comments made within the report. Unfortunately, there are a large number of areas where the School would
dispute the factual accuracy of the statements made. However, the School fully accepts that there are areas where improvements can be made
and considers the report to be valuable in further improving its processes.

Recommendations to the GDC
The inspectors recommend that this qualification is sufficient for holders to apply for registration as a dentist with the General Dental Council.

Instructions to the School
The School should take note of all the actions in the report and should evidence to the GDC, within stated timescales, that it has addressed the
actions which have a specified completion date.

34

