INSPECTION REPORT
Education Provider /
Awarding Body:

Newcastle University

Programme / Award /
Qualification:

Bachelor in Dental Surgery (BDS)

Remit and Purpose:

Full inspection referencing the Standards for
Education to determine the continuing
sufficiency of the award for the purpose of
registration with the GDC as a dentist

Learning Outcomes:

Preparing for Practice (Dentist)

Programme Inspection Dates:

22 & 23 April 2013

Examination Inspection
Dates:

3, 4 & 5 June 2013

Inspection Panel:

Michael McCulley (Chair and Lay Member)
Carolann Beck (Dentist Member)
Steven Farmer (Dentist Member)
Michael Fenlon (Dentist Member)

GDC Staff:

Ross Scales (Lead)
James Marshall

Outcome:

Recommended that the Newcastle University
BDS Programme remains sufficient for
registration as a dentist

Inspection summary
The inspection panel was impressed with the clarity and comprehensiveness of the
documentation received in advance of the inspection and found that the evidence
demonstrating each Requirement was easy to find.
The panel noted that the commitment and attitude of programme staff was exceptional and it
was clear that members of staff work together in a constructive way and recognise their role
to identify issues and areas for improvement. There is a very open ethos within School. An
external examiner commented to the panel that there is not the same hierarchy present as
there is in many other schools and the inspectors agreed with this.
The inspectors had no major concerns with any aspect of the programme, though there are
some areas where it was felt that improvements could be made. In many of these cases, the
School was aware that improvement was required and plans were already in place to
address these.
The quality management structure is well designed and the corresponding GDC
Requirements are clearly met by the programme. In addition, the inspectors found that the
assessment of students is appropriate, with assessors drawn from a variety of backgrounds
and an easy to use and descriptive grading system. The inspectors noted the plans to
develop the dynamic learning map and the e-portfolio and agreed that these systems will be
of great benefit to the programme. The inspectors agreed that the School’s efforts to
establish a link between the programme and Foundation Training were good practice.
However, some further work should be undertaken to ensure that the recording of patient
treatment and grades awarded is accurately recorded by all students and staff at all times. In
addition, further development of the collection and use of patient feedback is required.
The panel was assured that any risks to patients who are treated by students are minimised.
Students were taught not to treat patients as commodities and to deliver the appropriate care
for all patients. There were some improvements to be made relating to obtaining clear
documentary consent for treatment by students for all patients. The School would also
benefit from undertaking further work on highlighting the importance of raising concerns
where there is evidence or risks of patient harm, both during the programme and within
practice.
The inspectors could clearly see development of students as they moved through the
programme stages and were satisfied that upon graduation the students were fit to practise
as safe beginners.
The panel wishes to thank the staff, students, and external stakeholders involved with the
BDS programme for their co-operation and assistance with the inspection.

Inspection process and purpose of Inspection
1.

As part of its duty to protect patients and promote high standards within the professions
it regulates, the General Dental Council (GDC) quality assures the education and
training of student dentists and dental care professionals (DCPs) at institutions whose
qualifications enable the holder to apply for registration with the GDC and new
qualifications where it is intended that the qualification will lead to registration.

2.

The aim of this quality assurance activity is to ensure that these institutions produce a
new registrant who has demonstrated, on graduation, that he or she has met the
outcomes required for registration with the GDC. This is to ensure that students who
obtain a qualification leading to registration are fit to practise at the level of a safe
beginner.

3.

The inspection focuses on four Standards, with a total of 29 underlying Requirements.
These are contained in the document Standards for Education.

4.

The purpose of this inspection was to make a recommendation to the Council of the
GDC regarding the ‘sufficiency’ of the programme for registration as a dentist in the UK.
The GDC’s powers are derived under Part II, Section 9 of the Dentists Act 1984 (as
amended) to determine sufficiency of the programme.

5.

Inspection reports may highlight areas of strength and draw attention to areas requiring
improvement and development, including actions that are required to be undertaken by
the provider. Where an action is needed for a Requirement to be met, the term ‘must’ is
used to describe the obligation on the provider to undertake this action. For these
actions the inspectors may stipulate a specific timescale by which the action must be
completed or when an update on progress must be provided. In their observations on
the content of the report, the provider should confirm the anticipated date by which
these actions will be completed. Where an action would improve how a Requirement is
met, the term ‘should’ is used and for these actions there will be no due date stipulated.
Providers will be asked to report on the progress in addressing the required actions
through the annual monitoring process. Serious concerns about a lack of progress may
result in further inspections or other quality assurance activity.

6.

The provider of the qualification has the opportunity to provide factual corrections on the
draft report. Following the production of the final report the provider is asked to submit
observations on, or objections to, the report and the actions listed. Where the inspection
panel have recommended that the programme is sufficient for registration, the Council
of the GDC have delegated responsibility to the GDC Registrar to consider the
recommendations of the panel. Should an inspection panel not be able to recommend
sufficiency, the report and observations would be presented to the Council of the GDC
for consideration.

The Inspection
7.

This report sets out the findings of an inspection of the Bachelor of Dental Surgery
awarded by Newcastle University. The GDC publication Standards for Education
(version 1.0 November 2012) was used as a framework for the inspection. This
inspection forms part of a series BDS inspections being undertaken by the GDC 20122014.

8.

The inspection was comprised of two visits. The first, referred to as the programme
inspection, was carried out on 22 and 23 April. This involved a series of meetings with
programme staff involved in the management, delivery and assessment of the
programme and a selection of BDS students. The second visit took place between 3 and
5 June and is referred to as the examination/student sign-off inspection.

9.

The report contains the findings of the inspection panel across the two visits and with
consideration to supporting documentation prepared by the School to evidence how the
individual Requirements under the Standards for Education have been met.

Overview of Qualification
10. The BDS programme sits within the School of Dental Sciences of Newcastle University.
The programme has an annual intake of 79 students. The duration of the programme is
188 weeks over five years of study and training. Newcastle University also offer a
Higher Education Diploma in Dental Hygiene and Dental Therapy.
11. The students spend Year 1 and Year 2 developing their knowledge of basic sciences
and begin work in the simulated clinical environment in Year 2. From Year 1 students
attend clinics to observe or shadow students from later years. Direct patient treatment
commences in Year 3 and in Years 4 and 5 students attend school clinics, outreach and
placements. The School refers to years within the programme as ‘stages’ – Stage 1 is
Year 1 and so on.
12. The programme had been designed to meet the learning outcomes in GDC’s previous
curriculum document, The First Five Years. However, the School considered that, upon
graduation, their students would also meet the learning outcomes contained in
Preparing for Practice, which was published in late 2011. An exercise was undertaken
by the School to review the assessments undertaken by the final year (Stage 5) cohort
throughout the programme in order to establish the coverage of these outcomes.
Following this ‘reverse blueprinting’ exercise, the School elected to be inspected against
the new learning outcomes. The results of this exercise were made available to the
inspection panel.
13. The focus of programme development at Newcastle is for the programme to improve
incrementally. The approach of continuous improvement means that there has not been
a major revision of the BDS in recent years, though several changes have taken place.

Evaluation of Qualification against the Standards for Education
14. As stated above, the Standards for Education were used as a framework for this
inspection. Consideration was given to the fact that these Standards were approved in
late 2012 and that it may take time for providers to make amendments to programmes
to fully meet all of the Requirements under the Standards and to gather the evidence to
demonstrate that each Requirement is being met. The inspection panel were fully aware
of this and the findings of this report should be read with this in mind.
15. The provider was requested to undertake a self-evaluation of the programme against
the individual Requirements under the Standards for Education. This involved stating
whether each Requirement is met, partly met or not met and to provide evidence in
support of their evaluation. The inspection panel examined this evidence, requested
further documentary evidence and gathered further evidence from discussions with staff
and students.
16. The inspection panel used the following descriptors to reach a decision on the extent to
which the BDS of Newcastle University meets each Requirement:
A Requirement is met if:
“There is sufficient appropriate evidence derived from the inspection process. This
evidence provides the inspectors with broad confidence that the provider demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students is supportive

of documentary evidence and the evidence is robust, consistent and not contradictory.
There may be minor deficiencies in the evidence supplied but these are likely to be
inconsequential.”
A Requirement is partly met if:
“Evidence derived from the inspection process is either incomplete or lacks detail and, as
such, fails to convince the inspection panel that the provider fully demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students may not fully
support the evidence submitted or there may be contradictory information in the evidence
provided. There is, however, some evidence of compliance and it is likely that either (a) the
appropriate evidence can be supplied in a short time frame, or, (b) any deficiencies
identified can be addressed and evidenced in the annual monitoring process.”
A Requirement is not met if:
“The provider cannot provide evidence to demonstrate a Requirement or the evidence
provided is not convincing. The information gathered at the inspection through meetings
with staff and students does not support the evidence provided or the evidence is
inconsistent and/or incompatible with other findings. The deficiencies identified are such as
to give rise to serious concern and will require an immediate action plan from the provider.
The consequences of not meeting a Requirement in terms of the overall sufficiency of a
programme will depend upon the compliance of the provider across the range of
Requirements and the possible implications for public protection.

Standard 1 – Protecting patients
Providers must be aware of their duty to protect the public. Providers must ensure that
patient safety is paramount and care of patients is of an appropriate standard. Any risk
to the safety of patients and their care by students must be minimised
Requirements
Met
Partly Not
met
met
1. Students will provide patient care only when they have
demonstrated adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical

procedures, the student should be assessed as competent in
the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients
2. Patients must be made aware that they are being treated by
students and give consent



3. Students will only provide patient care in an environment
which is safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with
relevant legislation and requirements regarding patient care



4. When providing patient care and services, students are to be
supervised appropriately according to the activity and the
student’s stage of development.



5. Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained.
Clinical supervisors must have appropriate general or
specialist registration with a regulatory body



6. Students and those involved in the delivery of education and
training must be encouraged to raise concerns if they identify
any risks to patient safety



7. Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be
taken by the provider



8. Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and
apply as required. The content and significance of the student
fitness to practise procedures must be conveyed to students
and aligned to GDC student fitness to practise guidance. Staff
involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar
with the GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance.



GDC comments
Requirement 1: Students will provide patient care only when they have demonstrated
adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical procedures, the student should be
assessed as competent in the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients (Requirement Met)
The inspectors found the documentary evidence provided in support of this Requirement, as
for other Requirements, to be well laid out and comprehensive. The documentation clearly
evidenced that in Years 1 and 2, the focus of the programme is on teaching students in areas
that will provide the foundation for practice in later years. In addition to basic dental sciences,
part of the training in the early years is to attend clinics, where they shadow students in the
clinical years of the programme.

The inspectors were assured that students do not commence clinical patient care until they
pass gateway exams in the simulated clinical environment. There is an Introduction to Clinical
Dentistry course that covers essential areas and is assessed summatively in Stage 1, the end
of Stage 2 Semester 1 and at the end of Stage 2 Semester 2. There is also continuous
assessment throughout each year. These assessments take into consideration
professionalism, attitude and any significant events that may have occurred. The majority of
students gain exemption from the final practical gateway assessment in Stage 2 Semester 2
based on previous performance in eight practical assessments. The School believe that the
assessment is a robust gatekeeper to those who have not demonstrated the required level of
practical competence, attitude or professionalism and the inspectors found it reassuring that
this assessment is externally examined. At the beginning of Year 3, prior to commencing
patient treatment, students have a short refresher course to prepare them to begin on clinic.
The inspectors noted that the simulated learning environment has the same protocols as
patient clinics. The inspectors also noted that students are able to practice endodontic
procedures on extracted teeth, as opposed to plastic teeth, before they undertake endodontic
procedures on patients and felt that this provides assurance for the patient.
A number of students the inspectors met stated that they were eager to commence clinical
work earlier in the programme, but acknowledged that they were better prepared to treat
patients having gained the underlying knowledge that underpins clinical practice in the first two
years of the programme. On reflection, the students told the inspectors that they felt their
clinical experience was gained at appropriate stages within the programme. Students also
commented that the shadowing of students in later years and the work done in the simulated
clinical environment had prepared them well for the transition and they felt safe to treat
patients when they began on clinic.
Requirement 2: Patients must be made aware that they are being treated by students
and give consent (Requirement Met)
There are three routes for patients to enter the waiting list for student treatment. These are
through the dental hospital website, referral from a general dental practitioner (GDP) or by
attending an emergency clinic. How patients are made aware that they will be treated by a
student depends on this route. It was noted that there were a variety of methods and forms
that patients, or those responsible for patients, will use to provide consent.
For those coming through the website route, there is information on the webpages that
treatment will be undertaken by students which clearly states that treatment will be provided
for free, but that the cost to the patient is their time and commitment. For other routes, the
inspectors were told that patients should be informed that they are being referred and that their
treatment may be carried out by students.
Previously, consent from adult patients has only been given verbally and this was recorded in
the patient records by the student. The inspectors were assured that verbal consent is given
by all patients and that it is recorded.
The School recognised that, previously, it could have been made clearer to patients that they
are consenting to treatment undertaken by students. From April 2013, all adult patients are
required to provide documented consent. The inspectors found that the form developed for this
purpose explained the implications of student treatment clearly and comprehensively.
In outreach placements, consent is recorded in the patient records system (R4). Patients are
also required to confirm that they understand that treatment will be provided by a dental
undergraduate student by signing a treatment plan that indicates this. However, it was noted

that this did not indicate any possible differences between treatment by a student or by a
registrant other than the cost implications.
The paediatric treatment plan for prevention requires the parent or guardian to sign the form
that indicates the treatment to be undertaken, though it was noted that this form does not
clearly indicate that treatment will be undertaken by a student. The inspectors felt that the
communication that treatment is to be undertaken by a student and the subsequent recording
of this should be reviewed and a more explicit method of ensuring that informed consent has
been given be developed.
Signage is placed in patient waiting areas, which explains that treatment is carried out by
students and that concerned patients should speak to a member of staff. Staff and students
confirmed that when meeting a patient for the first time, a student will introduce themselves as
a dental student.
Requirement 3: Students will only provide patient care in an environment which is safe
and appropriate. The provider must comply with relevant legislation and requirements
regarding patient care (Requirement Met)
Patient care is delivered within Newcastle Dental Hospital and within community clinics which
are part of the Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust. All of these clinics are
subject to the Foundation Trust protocols. The Foundation Trust was audited by CQC in May
2012 and all standards were deemed to be met. The inspectors noted that monthly
environmental audits are undertaken, in addition to quarterly audits of health and safety
standards.
Incidents relating to staff, students and patients are recorded on a central recording and
reporting system (DATIX) and were available for the inspectors to view. The inspectors
reviewed the procedures and policy for incident handling and were pleased to note the ethos
of this document and the encouragement it promoted to report incidents. This is commented
on further under Requirements 6 and 7.
Requirement 4: When providing patient care and services, students are to be
supervised appropriately according to the activity and the student’s stage of
development (Requirement Met)
The inspectors felt that the supervision ratios provided by the School were appropriate for the
students’ stage of development and the work they are undertaking. The level of supervision is
adjusted according to risk, for example the levels provided were one supervisor for two
students for Stage 4 oral surgery, 1:4 for Stage 4 outreach and 1:7 on the Stage 5 adult
restorative clinic.
The inspectors noted the procedures in place for planned and unplanned leave of supervisors,
which were devised to maintain the supervision ratios. The inspectors felt that these
procedures were good practice.
The inspectors established in meetings with staff and students that supervision ratios are
maintained. It was also explained to the inspectors that these ratios allowed supervisors to
provide the appropriate level of supervision to help ensure patient safety and allowed sufficient
time to be spent with students to provide teaching and feedback.

Requirement 5: Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained. Clinical

supervisors must have appropriate general or specialist registration with a regulatory
body (Requirement Met)
The inspectors were pleased to receive a helpful and comprehensive database of the teaching
staff involved in the programme with details of their registration. All clinical supervisors have
appropriate registration with the GDC or other regulatory body.
All clinical teaching staff undertake an induction, the period of which is tailored to their role.
The induction includes shadowing, being shadowed, didactic teaching and role play, and all
are required to undertake other mandatory training by the Trust. Staff who work in outreach
placements are subject to peer review. They are also encouraged to attend the staff education
development day. Staff may study for a Higher Education Academy (HEA) accredited
certificate and the University trains senior and principal fellows of the HEA.
Dental hygienist therapists may teach and co-supervise students in areas that fall within their
scope of practice. The School utilises general dental practitioners (GDPs) on student clinics,
who provide link between academia and general practice. The GDPs that were met told the
inspectors that they felt very much part of the team, valued and well supported with a specific
induction, shadowing and on-going training which had really helped to achieve consistency
across the staff. Several members of the GDP team had been involved on the programme for
a long time and are now involved in training new staff.
The inspectors found that supervisors held appropriate registration with the GDC and there
were clear induction plans and training for clinical staff.
Requirement 6: Students and those involved in the delivery of education and training
must be encouraged to raise concerns if they identify any risks to patient safety
(Requirement Met)
Throughout meetings with staff and students the inspectors observed that the ethos within the
School is one of openness. This was reflected in comments from students, which assured the
inspectors that they would feel supported to raise concerns and understood how they would do
this and who the concerns should be raised with.
Staff and students are able to report individual incidents that have affected or may affect
patient safety on a DATIX incident reporting system. The inspectors were provided with an
example regarding a concern raised by students. However, they noted that this concern did
not specifically relate to patient safety.
The School has recently introduced a policy, with an accompanying lecture for students that
outlines staff and students’ responsibilities and obligations to raise concerns. The inspectors
felt that the programme should further build on this and, in future, include more comprehensive
induction and training for both staff and students on the importance of protecting patients
through raising concerns in their role in delivering patient care, including when they are no
longer working or studying at the School. The School should refer to the findings of the Report
of the Mid Staffordshire Foundation Trust Public Enquiry (Francis Report) when developing
this training.
Requirement 7: Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be taken by
the provider (Requirement Met)
The Foundation Trust has a clear policy regarding reporting accidents and incidents, which
incorporates the process to be followed in such an event and points to other relevant policies

that may come into effect. The electronic DATIX reporting system records clinical incidents
and ‘near misses’ reported by staff or students and it automatically informs key staff of
incidents. There are two trained investigators who will determine the level of investigation
required and record the outcomes of investigation and report their findings to the appropriate
committee. Data is collected through this system, which can identify patterns of incidents
related to individual students or staff members. The inspectors were able to review copies of
the incident log during the inspection.
Summaries of incidents are presented at relevant meetings, including those concerned with
health and safety. There are appropriate groups and committees within the School and Trust
structure to consider and action any incidents relating to patient safety. The inspectors were
able to see a relevant example where learning from clinical audit had been used to inform
student and staff training.
Requirement 8: Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and apply as
required. The content and significance of the student fitness to practise procedures
must be conveyed to students and aligned to GDC student fitness to practise guidance.
Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar with the GDC Student
Fitness to Practise Guidance (Requirement Met)
There is a fitness to practise policy which is aligned to the GDC Student Fitness to Practise
guidance. This policy is a joint policy for the medicine and dentistry programmes. The School
staff have received training on the student fitness to practise policy and students are given a
copy of the policy at the commencement of studies and they receive training at several stages
during the programme on fitness to practise, professionalism and their responsibilities.
There have been a number of referrals under the policy to the Faculty Fitness to Practise
panel, with a number being referred to occupational health. The recently developed e-portfolio
is able to record and monitor negative and positive events, which feed into progression
decisions. The inspectors noted that there was a strong focus on attendance as an indicator of
a student’s fitness to practise. The panel agreed that attendance can be an indicator of
professionalism issues, but felt there was over-reliance on this and would encourage the
School to consider other indicators of professionalism. This is discussed further under
Requirement 16.

Actions
Req.
Number
2

6

Actions for the provider
The School should take further steps to ensure that fully
informed written consent is obtained and recorded for all
patients who are treated by students on the programme.
The School should strengthen the training and induction for
staff and students to emphasise the duty within their
respective roles to raise concerns about patient safety.

Due date
(if applicable)
n/a

n/a

Standard 2 – Quality evaluation and review of the programme
The provider must have in place effective policy and procedures for the monitoring and
review of the programme
Requirements
Met
Partly Not
met
met
9. The provider will have a framework in place that details how it
manages the quality of the programme which includes

making appropriate changes to ensure the curriculum
continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and
adapts to changing legislation and external guidance. There
must be a clear statement about where responsibility lies for
this function
10. The provider will have systems in place to quality assure
placements
11. Any problems identified through the operation of the quality
management framework must be addressed as soon as
possible
12. Should quality evaluation of the programme identify any
serious threats to the students achieving learning outcomes
through the programme, the GDC must be notified at the
earliest possible opportunity







13. Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external
quality assurance procedures



14. External examiners must be utilised and must be familiar with
the learning outcomes and their context. Providers should
follow QAA guidelines on external examining where
applicable



15. Providers must consider and, where appropriate, act upon
concerns raised or formal reports on the quality of education
and assessment



GDC comments
Requirement 9: The provider will have a framework in place that details how it manages
the quality of the programme which includes making appropriate changes to ensure the
curriculum continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and adapts to
changing legislation and external guidance. There must be a clear statement about
where responsibility lies for this function (Requirement Met)
Responsibility for the programme lies with the Head of School, who delegates responsibility for
some areas to the Programme Director. There are various committees which manage the
quality management of the programme, placed across the School, Faculty and University. The
committee that is primarily responsible for quality management is the Board of Studies. The
Board of Studies has an overview of all activities and developments regarding the BDS and
agrees which developments will be prioritised. This committee has various sub-committees.
The inspectors were able to view minutes of the responsible committees during the inspection.
The Board of Studies was responsible for the management of the project to map the
programme assessment against the learning outcomes from Preparing for Practice. The

inspectors understood how this had been achieved within the quality management framework
and how further work in this area would be taken forward.
One development point identified from this exercise followed the realisation that the monitoring
of what had been taught and assessed throughout the programme was not as thorough as it
could have been. This has led to the development of a ‘dynamic learning map’. The
development of this should allow the School to closely monitor assessment and teaching
against both the GDC and the School’s own learning outcomes. The inspectors were able to
view a demonstration of this and noted that it is likely to be very effective when fully integrated
into the programme.
Significant use is made of the Staff and Student Liaison Committee (SSLC), which is chaired
by students, and several programme changes have originated through this. Students provide
annual evaluation of the programme and student evaluation feeds into the programme leader’s
three-year cyclical review.
The inspectors felt that it is particularly important that good quality management structures are
in place, where a programme is focused on continuous improvement. The inspectors found
that there were clear and effective systems and documentation in place that ensured that this
Requirement was met.
Requirement 10: The provider will have systems in place to quality assure placements
(Requirement Met)
Newcastle BDS students attend placements outside the School in Years 4 and 5 for one
session per fortnight, where they deliver direct patient care across four outreach locations. The
outreach course was introduced in Newcastle in 2004 and it has undergone extensive
evaluation since then. Details of the work undertaken to evaluate outreach was provided to the
inspectors.
The School refers to the relationship with outreach centres as ‘hub and spoke’ and they told
the inspection panel that they wanted to make outreach staff feel as much a part of the hub as
possible. To help achieve this, the School employs an outreach support officer, who has a role
to encourage outreach staff to participate in School activities, as well as providing general
support to outreach staff and representing them on the SSLC.
Outreach staff have access to School training programmes and events and attend staff
development days. New outreach staff shadow teaching sessions within the school, as well as
shadowing teaching within their outreach centre. The School operates a system where
experienced staff will peer review outreach teaching. Outreach staff also have experience of
assessing students during the end of Stage 2 clinical skills assessments. The inspectors felt
that there was very good support for outreach tutors and this was confirmed by the outreach
staff met during the inspection.
The outreach locations are all subject to CQC inspection which provides one level of quality
assurance. Students are asked to evaluate a number of elements of the outreach programme.
In addition there is peer review of teaching in outreach. The same grading scheme is used in
outreach as the School and steps are in place to ensure that outreach assessment scheme
and its application mirrors that in the School.
The inspectors felt that the quality of the outreach placements was assured by the various
mechanisms in place, including the feedback methods and the thorough induction and
continued support of outreach staff from the School.

Requirement 11: Any problems identified through the operation of the quality
management framework must be addressed as soon as possible (Requirement Met)
As detailed under Requirement 9, the inspectors felt that the quality management framework
of the School is well-structured and robust. The inspectors were assured through the
documentary evidence provided that the framework allowed issues to be appropriately
considered and changes to be made to address these. Issues that arise are recorded and
action is taken at a local level, where possible, though escalation to higher level committees is
possible. The inspectors were provided with examples demonstrating changes made at
different levels within the School structure. These examples had initiated action through the
operation of the quality management framework and the panel was satisfied with how these
issues had been dealt with. The committee framework is structured so that an individual is
responsible for tracking and providing updates on live issues to the various committees.
Requirement 12: Should quality evaluation of the programme identify any serious
threats to the students achieving learning outcomes through the programme, the GDC
must be notified at the earliest possible opportunity (Requirement Met)
The inspectors were assured that the School monitored threats to the programme and they
were provided with extracts from various committees to illustrate that relevant discussions had
taken place. The inspectors agreed that none of the issues that had arisen were serious
enough to warrant referral to the GDC.
Requirement 13: Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external quality
assurance procedures (Requirement Met)
As outlined under the above Requirements, the inspectors found that there were several
internal quality assurance methods and relevant policies and procedures in place. There is
involvement at programme, faculty and university levels for internal quality assurance. The
Programme Director produces an annual monitoring report to identify programme strengths
and weaknesses, following a reflective process, and this is considered by the Board of
Studies.
In addition to this, the University provides an Internal Subject Review on a five year cycle.
Recent reviews and reports were made available to the inspectors and the findings of these
were reflected in the discussions with staff and students. The inspectors were particularly
impressed with the attitude across senior staff to addressing all findings and feedback
received, rather than explaining why a situation has arisen. An excellent example of this was
the drive to act on student dissatisfaction with the feedback they received, identified in the
national student survey. Rather than adopting the often held approach that students will
always complain about the level of feedback they receive, the School was taking action to
improve the feedback given to students.
The institution is subject to quality assurance from the Quality Assurance Agency for Higher
Education (QAA). In addition, external examiners are utilised in a scrutiny role for each Stage
of the programme.
Requirement 14: External examiners must be utilised and must be familiar with the
learning outcomes and their context. Providers should follow QAA guidelines on
external examining where applicable (Requirement Met)

External examiners are appointed to each Stage (year) of the BDS for a four-year term. Upon
appointment, external examiners are provided with a generic University handbook that outlines
their roles and responsibilities as an external examiner at Newcastle University. Since 2008,
the School has required the external examiners for stages 1-4 to focus on the monitoring of
standards, rather than examining students. In 2013 the three Stage 5 external examiners did
not examine the students for the first time. Their role was to approve papers, sample students’
work and moderate and validate the assessments.
The role of external examiners had recently changed, as detailed above, to reflect QAA
guidance. The external examiners reported to the inspectors and at the exam board that they
felt this was a positive development. The inspectors agreed that those undertaking the external
examiner role were appropriately qualified and familiar with the learning outcomes.
Requirement 15: Providers must consider and, where appropriate, act upon concerns
raised or formal reports on the quality of education and assessment (Requirement Met)
To evidence this Requirement, the School provided the inspectors with a number of internal
reports on the programme and the School responses to these. These included the 2010
internal subject review: The inspectors noted that membership of this review included a
senior academic from another BDS programme. The inspectors saw how recommendations
from these reports had been actioned across the programme and were satisfied that this
Requirement was met. As described under Requirements 9 and 11 above, the inspectors
were assured by the School and University quality management framework.

Actions
Req.
Number
-

Actions for the provider
None

Due date
(if applicable)
n/a

Standard 3– Student assessment
Assessment must be reliable and valid. The choice of assessment method must be
appropriate to demonstrate achievement of the GDC learning outcomes. Assessors
must be fit to perform the assessment task
Requirements
Met
Partly Not
met
met
16. To award the qualification, providers must be assured that
students have demonstrated attainment across the full range

of learning outcomes, at a level sufficient to indicate they are
safe to begin practice. This assurance should be underpinned
by a coherent approach to aggregation and triangulation, as
well as the principles of assessment referred to in these
standards.
17. The provider will have in place management systems to plan,
monitor and record the assessment of students throughout
the programme against each of the learning outcomes



18. Assessment must involve a range of methods appropriate to
the learning outcomes and these should be in line with
current practice and routinely monitored, quality assured and
developed



19. Students will have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and will undertake each activity relating
to patient care on sufficient occasions to enable them to
develop the skills and the level of competency to achieve the
relevant GDC learning outcomes
20. The provider should seek to improve student performance by
encouraging reflection and by providing feedback1.
21. Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills,
experience and training to undertake the task of assessment,
appropriate general or specialist registration with a regulatory
body







22. Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent
to which assessment processes are rigorous, set at the
correct standard, ensure equity of treatment for students and
have been fairly conducted



23. Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear
criteria. Standard setting must be employed for summative
assessments



24. Where appropriate, patient/peer/customer feedback
should contribute to the assessment process
25. Where possible, multiple samples of performance must
be taken to ensure the validity and reliability of the
assessment conclusion

1





Reflective practice should not be part of the assessment process in a way that risks effective student use

26. The standard expected of students in each area to be
assessed must be clear and students and staff involved
in assessment must be aware of this standard



GDC comments
Requirement 16: To award the qualification, providers must be assured that students
have demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes, at a level
sufficient to indicate they are safe to begin practice. This assurance should be
underpinned by a coherent approach to aggregation and triangulation, as well as the
principles of assessment referred to in these standards (Requirement Met)
As detailed in the introduction, students in the final year (Stage 5) cohort at the time of the
inspection began their studies on a programme designed to meet the learning outcomes
from The First Five Years. The inspectors were told that the School staff believed that the
programme delivered students who would also meet the new learning outcomes from
Preparing for Practice, though the staff could not be certain whether each outcome had
been assessed. To determine this, an exercise to map across all formative and
summative assessments undertaken by the Stage 5 cohort was instigated. Where there
were gaps in assessment identified, future assessments were amended to ensure that all
outcomes had been assessed. The mapping document was made available to the
inspection panel and the inspectors found this very helpful to determine assessment
coverage of the learning outcomes from Preparing for Practice. The School acknowledged
that some learning outcomes had only been assessed on a limited number of occasions.
The inspection panel noted this and agreed that further work must be done to fully
integrate the new learning outcomes throughout the programme and ensure that all
outcomes are appropriately assessed on multiple occasions. The inspectors require that
the School should provide updates to the GDC on the progress of this exercise through
the annual monitoring process.
As introduced under Requirement 9, the School has developed a ‘dynamic learning map’
to record all assessments against the learning outcomes from Preparing for Practice and
the School’s own learning outcomes. The inspectors were given a demonstration of this
electronic system, which will be fully integrated for the 2017 graduating cohort. It was
confirmed that the mapping exercise will be repeated for the next three cohorts until the
dynamic learning map is fully integrated.
The descriptive four-point grading scheme employed on the programme was simple in
design and sensibly applied. The grades given were Merit, Satisfactory, Borderline and
Unsatisfactory; however, a Borderline grade could not be awarded for the formal in-course
assessments of clinical competency that feed into the Finals assessment. There was
evidence of the full range of marks being used. This scheme gave the inspectors
confidence that the students had been graded with reference to an acceptable standard of
work.
Throughout clinical elements of the programme, the students were required to complete
23 clinical competency assessments covering core skills and procedures. The panel felt
that the clinical competencies tested an appropriate range of clinical and professional
skills. The inspectors were pleased that these practical assessments contributed to the
final Stage 5 examination and saw how they fed into the assessment matrix. Before taking
a competency assessment, the student agrees with staff that they have reached the
appropriate stage of development. The standard of all the competency assessments is set
at the level of a practitioner that is a safe beginner and students are assessed by two
members of staff.

Professional behaviour is assessed on multiple occasions throughout the programme,
including during formative clinical assessments. Both positive and negative events are
recorded. The inspectors found that there was a heavy reliance on attendance and the
absence of significant negative incidents as indicators of professionalism. It was felt that
other assessment of professionalism should be considered and developed in conjunction
with the e-portfolio. Where appropriate the School should consider utilising positive and
negative and proactive and reactive assessment methods.
All summative assessments for Year 5 students were made available to the inspectors.
Particular attention was paid to the final assessments, which look at a broad range of
areas, including clinical skills and knowledge and understanding of basic dental science.
During the inspection of the final examination, the inspectors noted that there was
frequent reference to the implications of grading a student at a Borderline or
Unsatisfactory level, which was regarded as good practice. The inspectors were able to
understand how it was determined that students pass or fail the final year assessments
and how compensation may be applied. The panel was pleased that only limited
compensation was permitted and that it was not permitted between unrelated subjects
and assessments. Throughout the final assessments, the inspectors were reassured by a
continued focus from examiners on whether a student was fit to practise as a safe
beginner.
At the meeting with the final year students the students told the inspectors that they felt they
had the right thought processes to enable them to safely progress into practice – and
foundation training. They said that they were confident about what they could do and the limits
of their abilities and when to ask for help or refer to a more experienced colleague.
The inspectors also noted that the BDS students were provided with multiple opportunities
to work closely with hygienist therapist students and felt that this would be a great benefit
to help them prepare for practice.
Requirement 17: The provider will have in place management systems to plan, monitor
and record the assessment of students throughout the programme against each of the
learning outcomes (Requirement Met)
Every assessment is held centrally and, as detailed under Requirement 16, the mapping of
assessment against the learning outcomes from Preparing for Practice was a largely
retrospective exercise undertaken for the final year students. This exercise will be repeated for
the next three cohorts. For future cohorts, graduating from 2017, the mapping of assessment
and delivery against learning outcomes will be tracked and held within the dynamic learning
map.
Student clinical experience is recorded within the e-portfolio. The inspectors were informed that
students are responsible for the recording of the treatment they have undertaken and this is
signed-off by a supervisor. The supervisor grades the student within the e-portfolio and this
information is recorded centrally.
The inspectors found clinical competencies to be well recorded, and noted that they will be
integrated into the e-portfolio for future cohorts. In terms of experience of treating patients and
the continuous clinical assessment of this, the inspectors felt that further work should be
undertaken to explore how the School keeps track of students who are struggling with
obtaining sufficient clinical experience in certain areas (see Requirement 19).
The inspectors agreed that the assessment strategy was sensible and designed to drive
learning.

Requirement 18: Assessment must involve a range of methods appropriate to the
learning outcomes and these should be in line with current practice and routinely
monitored, quality assured and developed (Requirement Met)
The provider utilises a variety of assessment methods, which the inspectors felt were used
appropriately across the programme to assess knowledge, applied knowledge, understanding
and clinical and other skills. The key committee in place that looks at assessment methodology
and development is the Assessment and Exams Committee. The minutes of this committee
and its sub-committees were made available to the inspectors and demonstrated the active
monitoring and development of programme assessments. The development of assessment
methods and practice reflects the School’s approach to continuous improvement.
During the final assessments, the inspectors noted that there were some discrepancies in the
approaches of different examiner pairs. The inspectors felt that clearer instruction should be
given to examiners in how a mark should be agreed in these high stakes summative
assessments as some pairs marked independently then agreed a mark, whereas other pairs
agreed the mark without marking independently. The inspectors recommend that the former
approach is taken and explicit directions are given to examiners. One obstacle to this, noted by
the inspectors was that there was only a short period of time for examiners to discuss
candidate performance between students, particularly for the restorative case presentation
assessment. It is recommended that this period is lengthened to allow for greater discussion,
particularly where a student has performed on the cusp of two grade boundaries.
The inspectors felt that some of the questions asked of students in oral assessments were
assessing knowledge only and that these may be more suited to written assessment. The
inspectors observed that on occasion, when trying to extract an answer from students, some
examiners turned a question into a verbal multiple choice question or sought agreement from a
student to an assertion that they had made. The School should consider whether there should
be a greater focus within oral assessments to assess a student’s application of knowledge and
understanding its relevance to the patient and the case being discussed. The inspectors felt
that it would be beneficial if further guidance was provided to examiners on suitable
questioning techniques for summative oral assessments.
Requirement 19: Students will have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and will undertake each activity relating to patient care on
sufficient occasions to enable them to develop the skills and the level of competency to
achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes (Requirement Met)
Students develop their clinical skills on phantom heads within Stages 2,3 and 4 and can return
to the clinical skills laboratory throughout the programme. The clinical skills programme
comprises of six courses. The School emphasises the role of this programme in developing
students into safe beginners.
The inspectors were informed that the School uses a specialised system to closely monitor
availability of patients to ensure students see the right number and variety of patients and case
types so that they are able to develop core skills. The e-portfolio records the clinical activity of
students and the associated formative assessment of students. The inspectors were told that
student profiles within the e-portfolio are reviewed to ensure students have an appropriate
case-mix of patients and to identify those who have low clinical outputs in comparison to peers
and course expectations. The students confirmed that they meet with clinicians twice per year
to look at patient treatment experience.

The inspectors found that, generally, students had comparable levels of experience to other
programmes and in some areas very good levels of experience. The inspectors were assured
by the level of experience of the students, when combined with the rigour of the clinical
competency assessments. As discussed in Requirement 16, these assessments are graded at
the level of a safe beginner registrant and students must pass each of them to graduate.
The inspectors agreed with the School that it is important for patients not to be ‘traded’
between students and that the School’s ethos of allowing students and patients to build
relationships was good practice. However, at times, there was a marked variance in clinical
experience between individual students. The inspectors felt that greater attention should be
paid to ensuring that student experience is regularly monitored and where a student has
significantly lower experience than others within the cohort, action should be taken to address
this. It was noted that a minority of students had much less patient treatment recorded than
others across multiple areas. Where a student has only completed, for example, a very limited
number of extractions or endodontic procedures compared to others within the cohort, a
greater focus should be placed on increasing their experience. If this is not possible,
discussions regarding their clinical competence in these areas (including the use of
transferrable skills) should be recorded.
The inspectors were told that some of the variation in recorded experience was due to students
under-recording their experience. The panel felt that this has an effect on the data analysis and
that it could also highlight transferrable record-keeping problems. Efforts must be made to
eliminate discrepancies in the recording of student clinical experience.
Within the e-portfolio, students develop a personal development plan (PDP). On completion of
the BDS this plan, including data relating to clinical experience and ability, is available to
students in foundation training. Providing this helps to inform the deanery and trainer of the
student’s level of experience and any specific areas in which a student requires support and
further development. The inspectors agreed that this interface with foundation training was
good practice and should be considered by other dental schools.
The inspectors noted that it would have been beneficial if students were able to spend more
time in outreach and both staff and students told the panel that they would welcome this, but
there was an understanding from all parties that there were financial constraints that prevented
this at the time of the inspection.

Requirement 20: The provider should seek to improve student performance by
encouraging reflection and by providing feedback (Requirement Met)
Work on critical reflection commences in Stage 1 and students receive training on effective
reflection. A criterion based matrix is used for student to grade their own performance.
Students are encouraged to reflect on their performance in clinic and in the clinical skills
laboratory and to grade themselves in the e-portfolio based on this matrix. Tutors discuss the
self-evaluation with students and provide them with feedback.
Students complete a more thorough self-assessment twice a year, which feeds into their
biannual review and contributes to the PDP. The students told the inspectors that they found
the e-portfolio a useful and constructive tool in their critical self-appraisal and there was
recognition from students that this is a significant skill for foundation training that will benefit
them throughout their career. During the final assessments, the inspectors observed that there
was a reflective element to the case presentations and that the students were assessed on
this.
The inspectors were told by senior staff that although there are several systems in place to

allow students to reflect and for feedback to be given on their performance, the School is
actively trying to improve these aspects of the programme. It had commissioned a study to
identify student perceptions of the feedback that they receive and to fully understand all the
issues in this area.
The School had recently improved the timeliness of student feedback on summative
assessments, which is now provided within 9-11 days of the assessment. The inspectors were
told by the students that feedback had noticeably improved and that they felt that the feedback
they received was helpful and enabled them to better understand how they are developing.
The inspectors sampled some of the written feedback received by students and agreed that it
appeared to be reasonable and appropriate. It was understood that further feedback is also
given verbally to students.
The inspectors were impressed with the attitude to providing feedback and facilitating student
self-reflection across the School. The School is trying to actively understand and address
student perception that only limited feedback is received. The inspectors noted some very
good work undertaken to fully incorporate self-reflection into the programme.
Requirement 21: Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills, experience and
training to undertake the task of assessment, appropriate general or specialist
registration with a regulatory body (Requirement Met)
The School provided the inspection panel with details of internal and external examiners. The
inspectors noted that all examiners held registration with the GDC. Whilst observing the Stage
5 examinations, the inspectors were assured that those examining students were experienced
at examining and had good knowledge of the areas being assessed. The inspectors agreed
that these examiners reached fair assessment conclusions, probing students’ understanding
where appropriate. However, the inspectors felt that there were some inconsistencies in the
assessment approach on occasion, as detailed under Requirement 18. These could be
addressed with further work on calibration through training sessions, more detailed briefing
documentation or even with an enhanced pre-assessment briefing.
Students in Stage 5 take a formative mock assessment that mirrors the elements of the final
examinations. The inspectors were told that this assessment is also used for examiner training.
The School provided details of an example of ad hoc training that had been arranged for
internal examiners.
Senior staff told the inspectors that part-time teachers were used in the assessments as the
School valued the pragmatism of those who are a bit further removed from the University. In
addition to dentists from a variety of backgrounds, students are assessed by hygienist
therapists and dental nurses for certain tasks that fall within the scope of practice of these
registrants. For example, dental nurses will assess a student’s infection control and adherence
to health and safety protocols. They provide formative feedback to students on their
performance and have access to students’ e-portfolios and are able to report positive and
negative significant events. The inspectors agreed that the approach to using
examiners/assessors from different registrant categories and from a variety of backgrounds
was good practice.
Requirement 22: Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent to
which assessment processes are rigorous, set at the correct standard, ensure equity of
treatment for students and have been fairly conducted (Requirement Met)
External examiners are employed for each year of the programme and provide the School with

a written report of their findings. The external examiner reports evaluate standards of
attainment, learning outcomes, assessment methods, marking criteria and fairness and
consistency of the examination process. The 2012 external examiner reports were provided by
the School in advance of the inspection.
The inspectors met with the Stage 5 external examiners during the final examination
inspection, who confirmed that they were clear about the expectations of the School, they felt
listened to and that the issues that they had raised previously had been addressed. The
inspectors agreed that this Requirement was met.
Requirement 23: Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear criteria.
Standard setting must be employed for summative assessments (Requirement Met)
The inspectors were informed that standard setting has been used in all summative written,
objective structured clinical examinations (OSCEs) and on-line assessments since 2008.
Where standard setting is not used for summative assessments, such as case studies and the
clinical competencies, the assessment is always criterion referenced. The inspectors felt that
this is an appropriate approach.
During discussions with students the inspectors were assured that students knew what was
expected of them in assessments and that any grading criteria are received in advance of the
assessment. Students told the inspectors that they felt that clinical work, including clinical
competency assessments, are fairly graded and assessments adhere to the assessment
matrix.
The inspectors observed the examination and award board that followed the Stage 5 final
examination and were assured that the rules for assessment conclusions were fairly applied
and adhered to the School’s grading system.
Requirement 24: Where appropriate, patient/peer/customer feedback should
contribute to the assessment process (Requirement Partly Met)
Peer feedback is introduced early in the programme and it is formatively assessed. Students
are assessed on their ability to appraise other students’ work and their ability to give feedback
to fellow students. The inspectors agreed that this use of peer feedback is appropriate.
Students must collect feedback from a limited selection of patients within outreach. This
exercise forms part of the formative assessment of the students’ portfolio review. The School
informed the inspectors that they are seeking to strengthen the programme in this area.
Consequently, a questionnaire, developed and validated on the medical programme, that
seeks patient feedback regarding student interpersonal skills is being piloted within the BDS
programme. The inspectors felt that this would be a significant benefit to the programme as, at
the time of the inspection the collection and use of patient feedback was quite limited in scope
and range and could be enhanced.
Requirement 25: Where possible, multiple samples of performance must be taken to
ensure the validity and reliability of the assessment conclusion (Requirement Met)
The inspectors were assured by the blueprint provided for the Stage 5 cohort, which detailed
where each learning outcome had been assessed throughout the programme, and agreed that
this demonstrated clearly that students had been assessed in each outcome. The inspectors
agreed that the dynamic learning map will be a great benefit in future and will allow much

closer analysis of the attainment of the learning outcomes throughout the programme. The eportfolio allows the School to monitor and record clinical assessments and determine where a
student has not demonstrated achievement of particular learning outcomes. The inspectors
were assured by the Stage 5 assessments and noted that a range of learning outcomes must
be demonstrated at this point for a student to pass the BDS.
Requirement 26: The standard expected of students in each area to be assessed must
be clear and students and staff involved in assessment must be aware of this standard
(Requirement Met)
Assessments, including the continuous clinical assessments are marked against clear criteria.
In addition, examiners/assessors are provided with guidance and/or are briefed on the
standard for each assessment. As detailed under Requirement 16, the inspectors found the
grading scheme clear and logical and agreed that it would be straightforward to apply.
The University dictates that students must be told the learning outcomes, the timing of
assessments, when to expect results and when to expect feedback. As observed under
Requirements 23, the students confirmed to the inspectors that they were clear about the
standard expected of them. The inspectors found that documentation relating to the
assessments allows the students to see clearly what they need to do to pass each summative
assessment.
During the final examination, it was made explicit to staff during the briefings that they were
assessing students as fit to practise as a safe beginner. The assessment guidelines were very
clear regarding the implications of borderline and unsatisfactory grades. These guidelines were
available to students.

Actions
Req.
Number

Actions for the provider

Due date
(if applicable)

16

The School should provide updates on the transition to
the learning outcomes from Preparing for Practice
through the GDC annual monitoring process.

n/a

19

The School should take further steps to ensure that the
recording of all patient treatment undertaken by all
students is accurate and that any significant variation in
student experience is considered by staff and, if
necessary, action is taken to address this variation.

n/a

24

The School must continue its efforts to facilitate students
receiving feedback from a greater number of patients
from across treatment clinics.

Update to be
provided through
the 2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

Standard 4 – Equality and diversity
The provider must comply with equal opportunities and discrimination legislation and
practice. They must also advocate this practice to students
Requirements
Met
Partly Not
met
met
27. Providers must adhere to current legislation and best
practice guidance relating to equality and diversity



28. Staff will receive training on equality and diversity,
development and appraisal mechanisms will include this



29. Providers will convey to students the importance of
compliance with equality and diversity law and principles of
the four UK nations both during training and after they begin
practice



GDC comments
Requirement 27: Providers must adhere to current legislation and best practice
guidance relating to equality and diversity (Requirement Met)
The inspectors were provided with the University equality and diversity guidance in place.
This included policies in areas such as dignity at work and the Code of Practice. Students
sign an agreement on professional conduct which incorporates equality and diversity issues
and they are provided with a guide to the behaviour expected of them. This guide on
behaviour includes reference to the GDC, the University and the Trust requirements. The
School believes it complies with the Equality Act 2010 and a series of actions are being
implemented to address the requirements under this act.
The inspectors were informed that the School keeps track of grievances related to equality
and diversity and that only one had been received at the time of the inspection. The
inspectors reviewed the details of this grievance and the processes that had been followed
and were satisfied with how it was handled.
Regarding admissions, the School informed the inspectors that in-depth information has
been recorded and analysis of data relating to gender ethnicity and disability is undertaken.
This information is also analysed in relation to degree classifications. It is planned that any
issues that have been identified will be addressed in 2013 by the School Executive.
Requirement 28: Staff will receive training on equality and diversity, development and
appraisal mechanisms will include this (Requirement Met)
In 2012 compulsory training in equality and diversity was introduced for staff. Staff employed
by the Trust (and BDS students) are inducted by Trust and the University staff are inducted
by the University. The inspectors were assured that all staff had received equality and
diversity training in the three months prior to the programme inspection and were provided
with registers showing staff attendance and details of this training.
The School has a requirement, which is checked at appraisal, that all staff must have
equality and diversity training at least every three years. There is a field on the appraisal

review form to confirm that the reviewer has checked the date of relevant training.

Requirement 29: Providers will convey to students the importance of compliance with
equality and diversity law and principles of the four UK nations both during training and
after they begin practice (Requirement Met)
The School has a concept of ‘treating equally’ which is instilled in students from Year 1. The
inspectors probed students on the concept of treating equally, as they felt that a literal
translation of this may not be compliant with equality and diversity principles. The panel were
satisfied from discussions with students that they would not make assumptions about
individuals and there was understanding of the factors that may impact on individual choices.
Equality is introduced in Year 1 through the shadowing component of the programme and a
session on self-reflection follows introduction of the ‘treating equally’ concept. Further equality
and diversity training is placed at beginning of Year 3 in the clinical introductory course.
Students undergo on-line training to assess their knowledge and application in this area. This
assessment mirrors the assessment of all Trust employees and focuses on policies and
procedures. This assessment must be passed to progress to the next stage and commence
clinical work.
Students sign an agreement which states that they will “comply with the laws of the UK and
where relevant, any laws that apply specifically to England, Wales, Scotland or Northern
Ireland” and the inspectors noted that there was an awareness in students, particularly those
approaching the end of the programme of differences in legislation across the four nations of
the UK.
Actions
Req.
Number

Actions for the provider

Due date
(if applicable)

-

None

n/a

Summary of Actions
Req. Actions for the provider

Observations

Due date
(if applicable)

Response from the Provider
2

The School should take further steps to ensure that
fully informed written consent is obtained and
recorded for all patients who are treated by students
on the programme.

Adult consent form was fully implemented within the n/a
Dental Hospital in May 2013. Its use will be audited
in January 2014 to assure us of compliance.
An amended version of the above form is currently
with the Trust for approval for use in Outreach
clinics.
A revised paediatric consent form has been
designed and is currently with Trust for approval.
It is anticipated that both of the amended forms will
be in use by January 2014 at the latest and again
will be audited for compliance in June 2014.
These steps will address this action for all student
patients.

6

The School should strengthen the training and
induction for staff and students to emphasise the
duty within their respective roles to raise concerns
about patient safety.

All students are provided with a copy of the schools n/a
raising concern policy at Induction at each stage.
They are required to read the policy and accept its
content. They sign to confirm this. This will be
supported by a Raising concern lecture given to
each year of students 22nd- 31st January 2014. The
content of this has recently been revised to reflect
changes in GDC Standards and the findings of the
Francis report. The lecture also now contains
formative ‘quiz’ elements.

The professional development seminar series in
Stage 5 (ARC seminars) as of Oct/Nov 2013 now
include a seminar specifically on Raising concern
‘beyond’ BDS and the correct pathways.
The Dental Public Health clinical governance
workshops now include additional content in relation
to Raising Concern pathways – complete -Oct 2013.
All new staff are required to read and accept the
‘Raising Concern policy at induction.
In addition at the beginning of each Academic year
all staff are sent the Raising Concern policy and
asked to confirm by e-mail that they have read,
understood and accept the policy.
The Raising Concern policy is an agenda item on
the Schools Education Development Day, which is
always held on the 1st Friday in November.
The School now has a Professional Standards
Committee which meets on a termly basis to receive
any ‘concerns’ that have been raised, and decide an
outcome. This committee in turn reports to Board of
Studies.
16

19

The School should provide updates on the
transition to the learning outcomes from Preparing
for Practice through the GDC annual monitoring
process.

Prospective mapping is currently being undertaken n/a
for all student cohorts starting from September 2012
onwards).

The School should take further steps to ensure
that the recording of all patient treatment
undertaken by all students is accurate and that

A review the of ePortfolio procedures list is currently n/a
underway with the aim of streamlining procedure
recording and providing consistent data with the

A complete retrospective Blu-print of current stage 5
cohort of students will be available by April 2014.

any significant variation in student experience is
considered by staff and, if necessary, action is
taken to address this variation.

same nomenclature
disciplines.

across

different

clinical

This will in turn provide an easier production of
reports that can automatically highlight students who
are falling below expected outputs.
This report can then be independently considered in
preparation for student progress appraisal meetings.
This report will be considered alongside the
teachers evaluation of student progress and provide
consistency in terms of what is considered to be
cause for concern. For those students for which
there is cause for concern a formal review of
progress towards achieving remedial action plans
will be put in place.
These processes will be in place for Stage 5 SPA in
Dec 2013.

24

The School must continue its efforts to facilitate
students receiving feedback from a greater number
of patients from across treatment clinics.

A pilot project was initiated 18th November 2013 to
gather 10 patient questionnaires for each stage 4
student. These will be used immediately on receipt
to provide formative feedback during clinical
teaching sessions. Subsequently, the outcome of all
10 questionnaires will provide evidence for the
Stage 4 SPA meeting in January 2014.

Observations from the provider on content of report
Provider to record additional observations here

Update to be
provided through
the 2014 GDC
Annual Monitoring
exercise

Recommendation to the GDC
The inspectors recommend that this qualification is sufficient for holders to apply for registration as a dentist with the General Dental Council

