INSPECTION REPORT
Education provider/ Awarding Newcastle University
Body:
Programme/Award:
Remit and purpose:

Bachelor of Science; Oral & Dental Health
Sciences
Full inspection referencing the Standards for
Education to determine approval of the award for
the purpose of registration with the GDC as a
Dental Hygienist and Dental Therapist.

Learning Outcomes:

Preparing for Practice

Programme inspection dates:

7 & 8 March 2018

Examination inspection
dates:

11 & 12 June 2018

Inspection panel:

Kim Tolley (Chair and Lay Member)
Bal Chana (DCP Member)
Stuart Boomer (Dentist Member)

GDC Staff:

Rick Bryan
Krutika Patel (exam inspection only)

Outcome:

Recommended that the Oral and Dental Health
Sciences BSc be approved for registration of
dental therapists and dental hygienists to the
GDC Register.

1

Full details of the inspection process can be found in the annex
Inspection summary
This is the first inspection of the BSc Oral and Dental Health Sciences delivered and
awarded by Newcastle University. The programme was given provisional approval to
begin in 2015, by the General Dental Council (GDC). The purpose of this inspection
was for the panel to assess whether this qualification could be approved for the
purposes of registration as a dental therapist and dental hygienist.
The programme benefits from being led by a strong, cohesive team, who work hard
to ensure each student on the programme will graduate a safe beginner. Another
positive relates to the students being taught with the BDS cohort, which increased
understanding of dental team working.
The inspectors observed the final assessments and considered the unseen case a
good clinical case to be used to assess students’ knowledge. The line of questioning
that was put to students, was also very thorough and enabled students to
demonstrate their competence.
Where the programme is compromised, relates to the documentation and recording
of clinical activity. Being a competence-based programme, the panel was of the
view that there should be a formalised process in place to monitor and record all
clinical activity, to help assess student development. Student reflection on the online
platform iDentity, was another area that could be developed, as some of the entries
viewed by the panel were not detailed enough to be helpful to improve clinical
practice. Certain clinical procedures seemed to be completed early in the
programme and not revisited, which the panel viewed to be a risk of students being
deskilled.

Background and overview of Qualification
2

Annual intake

Programme duration
Format of programme

Stage 1 – (17 – 18) – 12
Stage 2 – (17 - 18) – 8
Stage 3 – (17 – 18) – 6
115 weeks over 3 years
Stage 1
Students undertake five 3 hours sessions
shadowing senior students on a treatment
clinic within Newcastle Dental Hospital
(NDH) and a NHS Staff Hygienist providing
treatment in the hospital.
These shadowing sessions form part of the
students Interpersonal Skills training and
their reflections on the observed behaviours
contribute to a formative assessment.
Students undertake an intensive simulated
skills training programme between weeks
29 and 42 of Stage1. This is followed by a
summative assessment of clinical skills
which acts as gateway for progression to
clinical practice.
Stage 2
Students are allocated to Periodontology
Clinic within NDH on three mornings (9.45
to 12.45) each week. They undertake the
management of adult patients who require
non-surgical management of periodontal
disease and caries management and
restoration alongside oral health
assessment and the implementation of
preventive strategies.
One morning each week is allocated on the
Child Dental Health (NDH) (10.30 – 13.00)
undertaking a range of treatments including
prevention, behavioural management,
caries management and restoration on
paediatric patients. During term 3 there is
also the opportunity to attend Paediatric
Dentistry Consultant Clinics.
Towards the end of stage 2 students
shadow one afternoon on the sedation
clinic (3.25 hours) in preparation for the
primary exodontia course in Stage 3.

Stage 3
NDH Clinics
Students are allocated to the Interprofessional Clinic (IPC) alongside stage 4
3

BDS students on three afternoons (13.45 to
17.00) each week. They undertake the
management of adult patients who require
non-surgical management of periodontal
disease and caries management and
restoration alongside oral health
assessment and the implementation of
preventive strategies. The set-up of the
clinics, supports team working and shared
patient care.
One afternoon per fortnight (13.45 – 17.00)
is spent on the Child Dental Health Clinic;
undertaking treatments that cover the full
scope of practice of a dental therapist on
paediatric patients
Students undertake a block allocation of 35
hours within the radiology department
during which they receive training and
experience in taking, processing and
mounting radiographs. This experience is
subsequently consolidated within other
clinical attachments (as above) within stage
3.
Students attend 12 Restorative Consultant
Clinics throughout the year and observe
how the Consultant and their team record
a history of the patient’s complaints,
undertake a clinical examination for the
patient concerned and develop a plan of
care for that patient.
Students attend the Sedation clinic for a
minimum of 3 sessions (13.45 – 17.00),
during which they undertake primary dental
extractions on patients receiving relative
analgesia.
Finally stage 3 students have the
opportunity to work alongside the Head and
Neck Oncology Dental Hygienist treating
patients who have been diagnosed with
head and neck cancer.

Primary Care Dental Outreach Clinics
(Community)
The clinical teaching within the Primary
Dental Care Outreach Course (PDCO)
takes place in a primary care setting and is
designed to complement the clinical
experience gained within the secondary
4

care setting of the Dental Hospital. PDCO
clinical activity gives students the
opportunity to provide dental care for a wide
age-range of patients within ‘community’
based clinics. Allocation to PDCO in Stage
3 is one afternoon per fortnight alternating
with the students’ allocation to the
Paediatric Dentistry clinic (NDH).
The PDCO clinics are located in different
areas of the City:
• Arthur’s Hill in the west end of the
city.
•

Kenton in the north west of the city.

•
•

Molineux in the east of the city.
Walker in the east of the city.

The panel wishes to thank the staff, students, and external stakeholders involved with the
BSc Oral and Dental Health Sciences programme for their co-operation and assistance with
the inspection.

5

Standard 1 – Protecting patients
Providers must be aware of their duty to protect the public. Providers must ensure that
patient safety is paramount and care of patients is of an appropriate standard. Any risk
to the safety of patients and their care by students must be minimised.
Requirements
Met
Partly Not
met
met
1. Students must provide patient care only when they have
demonstrated adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical
✓
procedures, the student should be assessed as competent in
the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients.
2. Providers must have systems in place to inform patients that
they may be treated by students and the possible implications
of this. Patient agreement to treatment by a student must be
obtained and recorded prior to treatment commencing.

✓

3. Students must only provide patient care in an environment
which is safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with
relevant legislation and requirements regarding patient care,
including equality and diversity, wherever treatment takes
place.

✓

4. When providing patient care and services, providers must
ensure that students are supervised appropriately according to
the activity and the student’s stage of development.

✓

5. Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained.
This should include training in equality and diversity
legislation relevant for the role. Clinical supervisors must
have appropriate general or specialist registration with a
UK regulatory body.

✓

6. Providers must ensure that students and all those involved in
the delivery of education and training are aware of their
obligation to raise concerns if they identify any risks to patient
safety and the need for candour when things go wrong.
Providers should publish policies so that it is clear to all
parities how concerns will be raised and how these concerns
will be acted upon. Providers must support those who do raise
concerns and provide assurance that staff and students will
not be penalised for doing so.

✓

7. Systems must be in place to identify and record issues that may
affect patient safety. Should a patient safety issue arise,
appropriate action must be taken by the provider and where
necessary the relevant regulatory body should be notified.

✓

8. Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and
apply as required. The content and significance of the student
fitness to practise procedures must be conveyed to students
and aligned to GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance.

✓

6

Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be
familiar with the GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance.
Providers must also ensure that the GDC’s Standards for the
Dental Team are embedded within student training.

Requirement 1: Students must provide patient care only when they have demonstrated
adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical procedures, the student should be
assessed as competent in the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients. (Requirement Met)
To prepare students for clinical practice, during Stage 1 of the programme, the students are
delivered topics in relation to the foundations of knowledge for safe practice. These topics
include the study of head and neck anatomy, physiology, oral diseases, dental materials
science, evidence-based practice, professionalism, interpersonal skills, nutrition and diet, and
behavioural sciences.
Throughout the programme, there are regular reviews of student progress and being a
competence-based programme, students complete a variety of assessment throughout their
training. The panel was informed that students are unable to progress to Stage 2 and onto
clinical attachments without demonstrating satisfactory knowledge and understanding in the
summative assessment. Those students who are required to repeat assessments, are able to
do so following an agreed period of training. Failure to pass this second attempt will result in
the student having to exit the programme.
Training in clinical protocols such as cross-infection control, record keeping and information
governance is provided and students must also complete Trust mandatory training. It is also
mandatory that all student complete the local anaesthetic training sessions to a satisfactory
standard, before being allowed to treat patients.
In addition, there are opportunities for the students on this programme to work alongside the
BDS undergraduates, which reinforces the importance of dental team working.
Requirement 2: Providers must have systems in place to inform patients that they may
be treated by students and the possible implications of this. Patient agreement to
treatment by a student must be obtained and recorded prior to treatment commencing.
(Requirement Met)
The School webpages clearly state that patients attending clinics at the Dental Hospital, will
be under the care of students. Patients who are allocated to student care from diagnostic
clinics, are made aware their treatments will be carried out by a student before being
referred.
Signage is displayed in patient waiting areas explaining the training function of the hospital,
and patients are directed to discuss any concerns regarding their treatment with a member of
staff. Evidence of this was seen by the panel during a tour of the clinical facilities.
The panel noted that there was a difference in the amount of information provided to patients
on the paediatric and adult patient consent to treatment by student forms. For consistency,
the panel was of the view that the patient information on both these forms should be the
same.
Requirement 3: Students must only provide patient care in an environment which is
safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with relevant legislation and
7

requirements regarding patient care, including equality and diversity, wherever
treatment takes place. (Requirement Met)
Monthly environmental audits are undertaken using the Clinical Assurance Toolkit. In
addition, a quarterly audit of health and safety standards is conducted with each clinical
department. The panel was provided with examples of how these processes have identified
areas that require attention.
The School uses the DATIX incident reporting system to capture data in relation to staff,
students and patient incidents. This data then informs any training needs/reviews of
protocols that need to happen to prevent a reoccurrence in the future.
The panel was provided with evidence of staff training records demonstrating that staff had
completed training in key areas of legislation including equality and diversity and patient
care requirements. Compliance with these mandatory requirements is monitored and feeds
into the Trust or University appraisal processes.
During the programme inspection, staff mentioned that some parts of the clinical
environment and IT infrastructure needed updating, and the School was in dialogue with the
Trust about making improvements. The panel was informed that funding needed to be
authorised, but the Trust understood the urgency and was making this a priority.
Staff also mentioned that during a period of bad weather, the heating failed on one side of
the building, resulting in clinics being moved to the other side of the Dental Hospital. The
panel was concerned that incidents such as these may affect the training of students and
would therefore like an update on when the Trust can release funding for improvements to
be made.
Requirement 4: When providing patient care and services, providers must ensure that
students are supervised appropriately according to the activity and the student’s stage
of development. (Requirement Met)
The panel was informed that ratios during clinical practice are determined by the stage of the
programme, the clinical activity and discipline. For example, students undertaking
periodontology tasks are supervised on a 1:4 ratio and during the Primary Dentition Exodontia
course, students are supervised on a 1:1 ratio.
Students stated that the ratios in clinic are sufficient but during some Thursday afternoon
sessions, it can be difficult to complete restorative tasks due to a lack of dental therapy tutors.
On occasion, the presence of the BDS students can mean opportunities to carry out certain
procedures are further reduced. However, both staff and students who did meet with the
panel, were happy overall with the support and supervision provided during the clinical
sessions.
The panel also saw evidence of a whiteboard system, which enables all students to
specifically book for dental nursing assistance, which contributed to student clinical
progression.
Requirement 5: Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained. This should
include training in equality and diversity legislation relevant for the role. Clinical
supervisors must have appropriate general or specialist registration with a UK
regulatory body. (Requirement Met)
Evidence of GDC registration for all relevant teaching staff was provided to the panel.
8

All new staff undergo a period of induction. In addition, full-time clinical academics and all
hygiene and therapy tutors undertake either the Certificate in Education or the Newcastle
Teaching Award as a minimum requirement.
New Associate Clinical Lecturers undertake shadowing and training relating to their chairside
teaching role at induction. This training includes workshops in chairside teaching training
which involves didactic teaching, role play, shadowing or being shadowed.
The panel noted the good relationships the School had built with the outreach placements, and
both staff and students commented that the staff working at these placements were very well
trained and offered a valuable teaching experience.
Requirement 6: Providers must ensure that students and all those involved in the
delivery of education and training are aware of their obligation to raise concerns if they
identify any risks to patient safety and the need for candour when things go wrong.
Providers should publish policies so that it is clear to all parties how concerns should
be raised and how these concerns will be acted upon. Providers must support those
who do raise concerns and provide assurance that staff and students will not be
penalised for doing so. (Requirement Met)
The School of Dental Sciences publishes a policy for both students and staff on how to raise
concerns. This policy is given to each student during the Stage 1 induction, and students are
required to confirm they accept and acknowledge this policy. The topic of raising concerns is
covered again during Stages 2 and 3 of the programme, with students required to attend a
lecture on the subject at the beginning of Term 2.
The panel was provided with a copy of this policy which demonstrated a clear process in place
to enable staff and students to raise concerns. The panel was also provided with an example
of concerns that had been raised in the past by students, and the subsequent actions that had
resulted.
Requirement 7: Systems must be in place to identify and record issues that may affect
patient safety. Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be taken by
the provider and where necessary the relevant regulatory body should be notified.
(Requirement Met)
As stated under Requirement 3, patient safety incidents are recorded using DATIX. Each time
an incident is logged, an email is automatically sent to key staff within the Dental Directorate.
The Directorate has two trained investigators whose role is to determine the required level of
investigation that is appropriate for the incident and the outcome is documented within the
DATIX system. The system allows incidents to be logged against individual staff and students
so that patterns of incidents can be monitored and addressed with further training if necessary.
Incidents and outcomes are also fed back during the twice-yearly Dental Hospital Clinical
Governance afternoons for which attendance by BSc students in Stages 2 and 3 is mandatory.
The clinical governance afternoons are also attended by all clinical staff.
The panel was provided with examples of incidents that had occurred and documentation
setting out how the School had responded to prevent a recurrence.
Requirement 8: Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and apply as
required. The content and significance of the student fitness to practise procedures
must be conveyed to students and aligned to GDC Student Fitness to Practise
Guidance. Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar with the

9

GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance. Providers must also ensure that the GDC’s
Standard for the Dental Team are embedded within student training. (Requirement Met)
The panel was provided with a copy of the School’s fitness to practise policy which is aligned
to the GDC’s Student Fitness to Practise guidance. Each student is given a copy of this policy
at the start of the programme, and this topic is discussed during each year of the programme.
During the programme inspection, the panel was provided with evidence of past student fitness
to practise cases, and information as to the outcome of each case.
Actions
No
Actions for the Provider
2
The School should ensure that both paediatric and adult patient
forms provide the same information to patients, for consistency.
3

The School should provide an update on when funding will be
released by the Trust to enable improvements to be made to the
clinical environment

Due date
Annual
monitoring
2020
Annual
monitoring
2020

10

Standard 2 – Quality evaluation and review of the programme
The provider must have in place effective policy and procedures for the monitoring and
review of the programme.
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
9. The provider must have a framework in place that details how
✓
it manages the quality of the programme which includes
making appropriate changes to ensure the curriculum
continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and
adapts to changing legislation and external guidance. There
must be a clear statement about where responsibility lies for
this function.
10. Any concerns identified through the Quality Management
framework, including internal and external reports relating to
quality, must be addressed as soon as possible and the GDC
notified of serious threats to students achieving the learning
outcomes.

✓

11. Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external
quality assurance procedures. External quality assurance
should include the use of external examiners, who should be
familiar with the GDC learning outcomes and their context
and QAA guidelines should be followed where applicable.
Patient and/or customer feedback must be collected and
used to inform programme development.
12. The provider must have effective systems in place to quality
assure placements where students deliver treatment to
ensure that patient care and student assessment across all
locations meets these Standards. The quality assurance
systems should include the regular collection of student and
patient feedback relating to placements.

✓

✓

GDC comments
Requirement 9: The provider must have a framework in place that details how it
manages the quality of the programme which includes making appropriate changes to
ensure the curriculum continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and adapts
to changing legislation and external guidance. There must be a clear statement about
where responsibility lies for this function. (Requirement Met)
The programme has a number of committees which form part of the quality management
framework governing this programme. The University Learning, Teaching and Student
Experience Committee is then responsible for developing the quality assurance policies and
processes in order to maintain the quality of all the programmes of study. The Faculty
Learning, Teaching and Student Experience Committee is then responsible for ensuring these
University policies are implemented and being followed. For this programme, the Head of
School is responsible for maintaining the standards of the educational framework, with the
quality management overseen by the various School, Faculty and University educational
committees.
At the centre of this framework, is the Board of Studies (BoS). The BoS is responsible for the
quality assurance of all the undergraduate programmes within the School. The Board also
11

oversees course reviews, which seek to identify if any proposed changes may affect the
delivery and achievement of any of the relevant learning outcomes.
All taught programmes also undertake a Learning and Teaching Review. This periodic review
takes place every 6 years and is led by internal and external peers and a student
representative. The purpose of the review is to provide evidence on the robustness of the
standards and the quality of the learning experience. An action plan is subsequently drawn up
to address the areas requiring development.
It was clear to the panel that all the programme staff are aware of the different boards and
committees that would need to be approached in relation to the quality assurance of this
programme.
Requirement 10: Any concerns identified through the Quality Management framework,
including internal and external reports relating to quality, must be addressed as soon
as possible and the GDC notified of serious threats to students achieving the learning
outcomes. (Requirement Met)
As set out under Requirement 9, there are a number of committees and boards that play a role
in ensuring the programme remains fit for purpose.
Part of the quality assurance process in place involves an Annual Review exercise, which is a
year-round process carried out by the BoS. This exercise is used to reflect on the operation of
the programme over the previous academic year and to develop an action plan for the
following year. It also provides assurance to the University that the BoS are fulfilling their role
in the management of their programme.
In addition, the quality assurance process is supported by a number of ‘Task and Finish’
groups. These groups are made up of staff members, who meet regularly to raise issues that
are affecting their respective programmes and discuss what would resolve them.
The panel was provided with examples of changes that have been implemented as a result of
the Annual Review.
Requirement 11: Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external quality
assurance procedures. External quality assurance should include the use of external
examiners, who should be familiar with the GDC learning outcomes and their context
and QAA guidelines should be followed where applicable. Patient and/or customer
feedback must be collected and used to inform programme development. (Requirement
Partly Met)
The programme is covered by one External Examiner for each stage of the degree
programme; their role it is to quality assure all assessments throughout the Stage for which
they are responsible. External examiners also observe how the case presentations and other
clinical summative assessments are conducted.
The panel was provided with previous External Examiner reports and it contained clear
recommendations that are picked up and addressed for future cohorts.
The School is currently undertaking an educational project to develop and validate a patient
questionnaire. The purpose of this questionnaire is to collect and analyse patient feedback
which can be used to better inform programme development.
Requirement 12: The provider must have effective systems in place to quality assure
placements where students deliver treatment to ensure that patient care and student
12

assessment across all locations meets these Standards. The quality assurance systems
should include the regular collection of student and patient feedback relating to
placements. (Requirement Met)
The panel was provided with evidence, which set out the processes relating to the quality
assurance of placements. These processes include the School running inductions for
outreach staff and inviting outreach staff to the School, so they are able to observe how the
tutors support students.
The panel was also provided with examples of student feedback and how this had resulted in
changes in the teaching of the programme. In addition, the School have a ‘Just One Thing’
feedback initiative for patients, which gives patients the opportunity to rate the students on
their communication skills and the likelihood that they would recommend the student to a
friend or family member, as well as suggesting one thing the student could do to improve the
patient experience. These feedback cards are handed to the patient by the student at the end
of the treatment. This information is then used to aid student progression and development
whilst studying on the programme.
The panel was informed that some patients in the outreach clinics wish to see specific
students and are then willing to follow that student to different outreach locations, as they are
so pleased with the quality of the treatment that that student is providing.
Actions
No
11

11

Actions for the Provider
The School must update the GDC on the progress of the patient
feedback project.
The School must take steps to utilise the patient feedback it
currently collects and use this information to feed into
programme development where applicable.

Due date
Annual
monitoring
2020
Annual
monitoring
2020

13

Standard 3– Student assessment
Assessment must be reliable and valid. The choice of assessment method must be
appropriate to demonstrate achievement of the GDC learning outcomes. Assessors
must be fit to perform the assessment task.
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
13. To award the qualification, providers must be assured that
students have demonstrated attainment across the full range
✓
of learning outcomes, and that they are fit to practise at the
level of a safe beginner. Evidence must be provided that
demonstrates this assurance, which should be supported by
a coherent approach to the principles of assessment referred
to in these standards.
14. The provider must have in place management systems to
plan, monitor and centrally record the assessment of
students, including the monitoring of clinical and/or technical
experience, throughout the programme against each of the
learning outcomes.

✓

15. Students must have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients and procedures and should undertake each activity
relating to patient care on sufficient occasions to enable them
to develop the skills and the level of competency to achieve
the relevant learning outcomes.

✓

16. Providers must demonstrate that assessments are fit for
purpose and deliver results which are valid and reliable. The
methods of assessment used must be appropriate to the
learning outcomes, in line with current and best practice and
be routinely monitored, quality assured and developed.
17. Assessment must utilise feedback collected from a variety of
sources, which should include other members of the dental
team, peers, patients and/or customers.
18. The provider must support students to improve their
performance by providing regular feedback and by
encouraging students to reflect on their practice.

✓

✓

✓

19. Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills,
experience and training to undertake the task of assessment,
including appropriate general or specialist registration with a
UK regulatory body. Examiners/assessors should have
received training in equality and diversity relevant for their
role.

✓

20. Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent
to which assessment processes are rigorous, set at the
correct standard, ensure equity of treatment for students and
have been fairly conducted. The responsibilities of the
external examiners must be clearly documented.

✓

21. Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear
criteria. The standard expected of students in each area

✓

14

to be assessed must be clear and students and staff
involved in assessment must be aware of this standard.
An appropriate standard setting process must be
employed for summative assessments.
GDC comments
Requirement 13: To award the qualification, providers must be assured that students
have demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes, and that they
are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner. Evidence must be provided that
demonstrates this assurance, which should be supported by a coherent approach to the
principles of assessment referred to in these standards. (Requirement Partly Met)
The provider uses a 4-point grading scheme for all examinations throughout the programme,
with an ‘S (Satisfactory)’ grade aligned to the standard of a safe beginner. The panel were
presented with a comprehensive blueprinting document which mapped the assessments
against the GDC learning outcomes. The panel were impressed with the quality of this
document and the evident importance of this document amongst the staff.
The panel were presented with clinical exposure aspirational goals that students are
encouraged to achieve. These had been set by the staff and they were useful figures. The
panel was presented with clear evidence of two students who had meetings to discuss the
levels of their clinical activity, as this was below what was expected of them. Subsequently
action plans were developed for these students but did not appear to be linked to the
aspirational targets that had been set. The panel was assured by the staff that these
aspirational targets compliment the competency-based nature of the programme. These
aspirational targets could be used more consistently to inform the Student Progression
Appraisal (SPA) meetings.
The panel were shown student data held on the ‘iDentity’ system with regards to clinical
experience and numbers of procedures undertaken. Whilst the panel agreed that the system
itself was impressive in relation to its capabilities, they did raise questions around the current
layout and its ability to showcase the finer details around a student’s experience. For example,
restorative procedures could be broken down further to show greater detail of each student’s
competence.
Requirement 14: The provider must have in place management systems to plan, monitor
and centrally record the assessment of students, including the monitoring of clinical
and/or technical experience, throughout the programme against each of the learning
outcomes. (Requirement Partly Met)
The panel was in agreement that the systems required to facilitate this are already in place in
the form of ‘iDentity’. However, they agreed that this was not being fully utilised in its current
state. For example, some restorations are entered under an old format (plastic restorations)
which results in finer details becoming lost under a broader heading. Whilst analysing this data
at the examination inspection, these figures were only made apparent after a verbal
explanation from the provider. Grades are attached to treatment episodes and so when
multiple procedures are performed, it is difficult to ascertain at what level of competence each
of the individual procedures were completed.
Students are provided with feedback after every clinical encounter, whether or not it is part of
an In-Course Competency Assessment (INCCA). Students who fail an INCCA will receive
written feedback on the reasons for their failure along with for all domains of the INCCA.
Although the feedback provided within the INCCA is consistent, the other feedback provided is
15

not standardised and the panel was of the view that if all student feedback was consistently
documented, it would ultimately contribute to student development.
The panel were provided with information surrounding the Student Progression Appraisal
(SPA) meetings, in which student progression and portfolios are reviewed and students with
low output are facilitated to gain further clinical experience, extra sessions and a tutor reviewed
action plan. The panel was happy that these meetings took place. However, they agreed that if
a competency-based approach is to be taken in conjunction with the aspirational targets then
these SPA meetings should be more frequent and more integral to the programme.
Requirement 15: Students must have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and should undertake each activity relating to patient care on
sufficient occasions to enable them to develop the skills and the level of competency to
achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes. (Requirement Partly Met)
The panel were aware of the points previously raised under requirement 13 and how these
subsequently transfer on to requirement 15. The panel were in agreement that the breadth of
patients available to students is very good, for example block and infiltration analgesia,
sedation, adult, paediatrics and special care patients in outreach. This gives the University a
fantastic opportunity to ensure that the students are getting a good breadth of experience. This
was translated in the breadth of experience that was evident in the student portfolios in
iDentity. However, as mentioned in Requirement 13, it is important that the School builds on
this opportunity and ensures that each student can reach the minimum aspirational number for
exposure that were set by the School.
The panel was provided with evidence to demonstrate that comprehensive blueprinting had
been undertaken. However, the panel identified that some learning outcomes are covered only
once at an early stage of the programme and are not revisited again, for example, 14.3 – Pulp
Therapy – Stage 1 term 3; and 14.4 – Preformed Crowns – Stage 1 term 3. By the time the
student graduates, two years will have passed which presents a real risk of deskilling for the
students and this may be an area that the provider wishes to review in order to provide some
safeguarding exercises.
Requirement 16: Providers must demonstrate that assessments are fit for purpose and
deliver results which are valid and reliable. The methods of assessment used must be
appropriate to the learning outcomes, in line with current and best practice and be
routinely monitored, quality assured and developed. (Requirement Partly Met)
The panel agreed that the provider currently utilises a good mix of question formats and styles.
The panel did discuss whether the Single Best Answer (SBA) method that is currently in use is
the best option to use for some assessments. It would be beneficial for the provider to
undertake a review using the data received from the first cohort before coming to a conclusion
on this.
Whilst meeting the students during the programme inspection, the panel were made aware that
the students would have liked to have had some more formative assessments in Stage 1 of the
course. The students stated that as they started their clinical skills earlier than some other
courses, there were quite long periods of time between assessment of these skills and that it
could be easy to experience deskilling as a result. Although the panel was assured that this
had not happened within the cohort, both the panel and the students were keen for this to not
pose a risk to future cohorts.
The panel also had the opportunity to attend and view the unseen case examinations and was
in agreement that the combination of the unseen case itself and the portfolios presented by the
students were very good. The panel did suggest that, as the unseen case was a new format to
16

the provider, this would provide a good opportunity for the provider to review the process and
identify any areas for improvement in order to further enable future cohorts to showcase their
depth of knowledge and independent thinking. The panel did highlight that there was potential
for the internal examiners to ask leading questions in some areas. However, it was agreed that
this was influenced more by the fact that this was the first time of operating this format rather
than prompting the students to provide the correct responses.
Requirement 17: Assessment must utilise feedback collected from a variety of sources,
which should include other members of the dental team, peers, patients and/or
customers. (Requirement Met)
The panel was provided with examples of feedback that is collected from a variety of sources
and stages throughout the programme. The panel was particularly impressed with the ‘Just
One Thing’ initiative that was led by students. At the end of each clinical session, the patient
would be given a small card asking them to write down one thing about the appointment that
was good or bad, which is very simple but provides some very important feedback to the
students; often on softer skills.
The panel was also made aware that peer dialogue was present throughout the programme,
but mainly encouraged during the Key Clinical Skills course.
The provider is also currently developing a larger piece of research around feedback using a
newly developed patient feedback questionnaire, which will only further strengthen the
utilisation of feedback collected at the School.
Requirement 18: The provider must support students to improve their performance by
providing regular feedback and by encouraging students to reflect on their practice.
(Requirement Met)
After meeting with students, a small number of students were happy to show the panel their
student portals on iDentity, in order to demonstrate how they kept and updated their portfolios
and more specifically, how clinical grading was confirmed by tutors on receipt of the clinical
procedures that they uploaded. In addition to the verbal feedback given at the time of the
clinical episode, the panel was pleased to see that iDentity was also being used by students
and clinical tutors to record additional comments and written feedback however, students did
mention that this functionality was not consistently used across the cohort.
The panel was also shown iDentity functionality that allowed students to record reflections
away from the clinical episode record. The use of this facility was inconsistent. The panel
would suggest the staff at the School need to encourage students to be more pro-active when
adding comments to clinical episode records, and with their engagement in the use of the
reflection log.
The panel did see instances and examples of reflection being embedded throughout the
programme and the examinations and were happy that the facilities were in place for students
to reflect effectively, and that these facilities were of a high standard.
Requirement 19: Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills, experience and
training to undertake the task of assessment, including appropriate general or specialist
registration with a UK regulatory body. Examiners/ assessors should have received
training in equality and diversity relevant for their role. (Requirement Met)
The panel was provided with detailed information surrounding the staff at the School. This
information, alongside meeting with various staff members, encouraged the panel to come to
an agreement that those involved in assessment were sufficiently qualified. The panel were
17

given confirmation that each staff member had completed E&D training provided by Newcastle
University. Similar information was also provided with regards to the External Examiner.
The panel attended the examiner briefing prior to the examinations taking place and were
assured that terms, policies and guidelines were discussed and agreed, with further approval
from the External Examiner. A guidance document was distributed amongst the assessors in
order to promote consistency for the students.
Requirement 20: Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent to which
assessment processes are rigorous, set at the correct standard, ensure equity of
treatment for students and have been fairly conducted. The responsibilities of the
external examiners must be clearly documented. (Requirement Met)
The panel was provided with reports, albeit for the prior Diploma in Hygiene and Therapy,
produced by the previous External Examiner which were compiled to a high standard. The
panel were also able to meet with the current External Examiner for Stage 3 of the BSc degree
programme and were assured that their induction and handover was of the expected standard.
The Stage 3 External Examiner spoke highly of the School and the process which they had
been exposed to since starting in post.
The Stage 3 External Examiner confirmed that they were consulted at all stages of the
examination process, including standard setting, development of the questions and marking
criteria. The Stage 3 External Examiner also confirmed that they were provided with
comprehensive guidance surrounding their responsibilities and what is expected of them
throughout their term. They had received the previous external examiner reports during their
induction.
The panel was provided with evidence of this in practice and were assured that the External
Examiner was being utilised efficiently and within the defined roles and responsibilities set out
in the guidance.
Requirement 21: Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear criteria. The
standard expected of students in each area to be assessed must be clear and students
and staff involved in assessment must be aware of this standard. An appropriate
standard setting process must be employed for summative assessments. (Requirement
Met)
After discussions with staff and students, as well as reviewing the inspection documentation,
the panel were confident that the expectations of each assessment were clear, and the criteria
required to achieve the necessary outcomes were concise.
The University utilises the EBEL process for standard setting, which was agreed as
appropriate during discussions with the External Examiner. Any exam questions that are
reused from year to year are reviewed and standard set again to ensure that they are still
appropriate for the stage of the student.
Actions
No
13

Actions for the Provider
The School must consider introducing a minimum figure for
clinical experience, in order to further supplement the
competency-based approach and the clinical exposure
aspirational goals to experience and exposure. They should use
these to inform progress meetings with students.

Due date
Annual
monitoring
2020

18

13

14

The School must consider amending the iDentity system in
order to provide greater detail when looking at such procedures
as restorations.
The School must consider attaching grades to the clinical
attempts shown in iDentity

14

The School must ensure INCCA feedback is consistent and
provided after each attempt.

14

The School must consider increasing the amount of Student
Progression Appraisal meetings per year in order to ensure that
competence is at the expected and required level.
The School must introduce some safeguarding exercises to
combat the risk of deskilling where significant periods of time
have elapsed since assessment, and INCCA’s are not present.
The School must undertake a review of the assessment
performance data after the first cohort to ensure that the mix of
questions and their application are as effective as expected.
The School must explore the possibility of introducing more
formative assessments in Stage 1, as per the student’s request.

15

16

16

16

18

The School must review the unseen case process, as this was
the first time facilitating this for the HT programme, and look for
improvements where possible.
The School should encourage students to reflect on iDentity as
often as possible.

Annual
monitoring
2020
Annual
monitoring
2020
Annual
monitoring
2020
Annual
monitoring
2020
Annual
monitoring
2020
Annual
monitoring
2020
Annual
monitoring
2020
Annual
monitoring
2020
Annual
monitoring
2020

19

Summary of Actions
Req.
Action
number

Observations

Due date

Response from Provider
The School will review both adult and paediatric
‘consent to student treatment forms’ with a view to
aligning the information provided and where
appropriate and possible amend them in line with
local NHS Trust requirements.
It has been confirmed that the Trust has agreed to
commence the first phase of clinical refurbishment
planning to start in Summer 2019.

Annual monitoring
2020

1.1

2

The School should ensure that both paediatric and
adult patient forms provide the same information to
patients, for consistency.

1.2

3

The School should provide an update on when
funding will be released by the Trust to enable
improvements to be made to the clinical environment.

1.3

11

The School must update the GDC on the progress of
the patient feedback project.

The patient feedback project is now complete and Annual monitoring
is now embedded within the School’s QA 2020
processes as of January 2019.

1.4

11

The School must take steps to utilise the patient
feedback it currently collects and use this information
to feed into programme development where
applicable.

Patient feedback is now routinely reported to Board Annual monitoring
of Studies as a standing agenda item where it 2020
informs programme development through the
embedded QE & QA processes. The first cycle was
reported and minuted in January 2019.

13

The School must consider introducing a minimum
figure for clinical experience, in order to further
supplement the competency-based approach to
experience and exposure. They should use these to
inform progress meetings with students.

There is no robust evidence that supports the
belief that clinicians must complete a minimum
number of procedures in order to develop
competence. As a result the majority of clinical
education programmes adopt a competency based
assessment strategy. At the recent GDC initiated
Tripartite Education Meeting on 4 th Feb 2019
between representatives of Dental Schools
Council, COPDEND and the GDC the pervading
view was that setting minimum figures for clinical
experience was completely inappropriate. This

Annual monitoring
2020

Annual monitoring
2020

20

1.5

13

The School must consider amending the iDentity
system in order to provide greater detail when looking
at such procedures as restorations.

14

The School must consider attaching grades to the
clinical attempts shown in iDentity

14

The School must ensure INCCA feedback is
consistent and provided after each attempt.

view was fully endorsed by GDC representatives.
This action request would therefore seem very
much to contradict this viewpoint. The School will
await further guidance from the GDC regarding this
issue.
The School undertakes a regular review and
amendment of procedures recorded within
iDentity. As a result we have already
implemented changes which will give greater
granularity to the recorded clinical experience of
our students. The procedure ‘plastic restorations’
has been removed on this basis.
This has always been the case since before the
introduction of iDentity. Currently, every clinical
episode undertaken by students (regardless of
whether it is associated with a clinical competency
assessment or not) receives five categorical
grades. These are all recorded on iDentity.

Annual monitoring
2020

Annual monitoring
2020

Your report already states correctly on page 15 that Annual monitoring
– “the feedback provided within the INCCA is 2020
consistent” and is provided after each attempt.
This INCCA feedback is delivered by virtue of the
structured standard marking scheme and has
always been. Consistency of written feedback is
ensured through a standard feedback template
which
forms
part
of
the
assessment
documentation.
Students also receive additional verbal feedback
supporting students in their development. This is
necessarily personally tailored and delivered after
the clinical encounter. By its very nature this
cannot be completely standardised. Going forward
the School will continue to make efforts to support
21

the clinical teaching team to provide consistency of
depth of feedback.
14

15

The School must consider increasing the amount of
Student Progression Appraisal meetings per year in
order to ensure that competence is at the expected
and required level.

The School must introduce some safeguarding
exercises to combat the risk of deskilling where
significant periods of time have elapsed since
assessment, and INCCA’s are not present.

Case review is undertaken with the students
involved as a matter of good professional practice.
To do this with clinical teachers, treatments must
be suspended. The School has considered the
balance between the need to review clinical activity
and the subsequent loss of opportunities to
develop clinical skills that are implicit with the
process of portfolio review. Having done this we
believe that the current number and timing of
reviews is appropriate for the majority of students.
Any students who has had concerns raised will
have additional action plans and interim reviews
put in place (as acknowledged in the report on
page 16). The school will review our processes to
ensure these additional reviews continue to take
place and are acted upon.
The School recognise that the time from
undertaking a training INSCA exercise to
undertaking a case on a patient is unpredictable.
The School already has in place a system where
students can revisit skills based exercises in a
simulated environment, at any time point they feel
this would be helpful to them. We encourage our
students to continuously reflect on their skills and
utilise these opportunities to update themselves
as they face clinical encounters they have not
encountered recently.
Nonetheless we would also argue that there are
multiple transferable skills which whilst not
explicitly associated with a specific procedure are
continuously developing within learners, and

Annual monitoring
2020

Annual monitoring
2020

22

these are formatively assessed after each and
every clinical encounter.
The School will continue to monitor the students
experience through SPA’s.
16

The School must undertake a review of the
assessment performance data after the first cohort to
ensure that the mix of questions and their application
are as effective as expected.

16

The School must explore the possibility of introducing
more formative assessments in Stage 1, as per the
student’s request.

16

The School must review the unseen case process, as
this was the first time facilitating this for the HT
programme, and look for efficiency improvements
where possible.

18

The School should encourage students to reflect on
iDentity as often as possible.

It is an aspiration of the School to extend the
current post-hoc analysis of performance in
assessment. In summer 2019 performance will be
reviewed against that of historical cohorts.
Individual question performance is reviewed and
any poorly performing questions are removed from
the question bank or revised before further use.
It must be recognised however that meaningful
post-hoc analysis is limited in value in a small
student cohort like this programme.
We will endeavour to continue to include examples
of formative assessment in supporting the
development of our students. However, it should be
re-iterated that the students currently receive a
significant formative assessment at the end of term
1 of stage 1 which supports their development.
We are confused as to why the panel has raised
this action in the way that they have. Whilst this is
a challenging assessment to deliver, its quality (as
recognised by the inspection team) and its ability to
examine a wide range of important skills and
applied knowledge make it a wholly worthwhile
investment. However, the School will continue to
review these processes through external examiner
feedback and as part of our internal QA systems.
The School continues to encourage and promote
effective reflective practice within all our clinical
programmes, however we recognise that effective
reflection may take different forms for different
learning styles and individuals. Whilst iDentity is

Annual monitoring
2020

Annual monitoring
2020

Annual monitoring
2020

Annual monitoring
2020

23

offered as a medium for reflection, we would not
wish to impose this style as the only forum for
reflection in order to allow auditing. Equally, we
would not wish to directly review the content of
reflection as this is recognised as
counterproductive in developing a truly reflective
practitioner. It deters full and frank appraisal of
events by a learner, therefore, undermining the
underlying purpose and strength of reflection in
the professional.
The ability of the students to reflect is, however,
extensively embedded in the programme as
commented on by the panel, and is assessed as
part of a summative assessment on 5 occasions in
the programme.

Observations from the provider on content of report
We thank the inspectors for their interaction and their professional collegiality in meetings, particularly with the students. We
need to continue to contest some of the factual accuracy of the report, and hopefully we have outlined this more clearly on this
second occasion by highlighting areas where the report and the actions appear to contradict themselves.

Recommendations to the GDC
24

The inspectors recommend that this qualification continues to be approved for holders to apply for registration as a dental hygienist and dental
therapist with the General Dental Council.
The School must provide detailed information regarding how they have met, or are endeavouring to meet, the required actions set down in this
report in their annual monitoring for 2019/2020.

ANNEX ONE
Inspection purpose and process
1. As part of its duty to protect patients and promote high standards within the professions it regulates, the General Dental Council (GDC)
quality assures the education and training of student dentists and dental care professionals (DCPs) at institutions whose qualifications enable
the holder to apply for registration with the GDC. It also quality assures new qualifications where it is intended that the qualification will lead to
registration. The aim of this quality assurance activity is to ensure that institutions produce a new registrant who has demonstrated, on
25

graduation, that they have met the learning outcomes required for registration with the GDC. This ensures that students who obtain a
qualification leading to registration are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner.
2. Inspections are a key element of the GDC’s quality assurance activity. They enable a recommendation to be made to the Council of the GDC
regarding the ‘sufficiency’ of the programme for registration as a dentist and ‘approval’ of the programme for registration as a dental care
professional. The GDC’s powers are derived under Part II, Section 9 of the Dentists Act 1984 (as amended).
3. The GDC document ‘Standards for Education’ 2nd edition1 is the framework used to evaluate qualifications. There are 21 Requirements in
three distinct Standards, against which each qualification is assessed.
4. The education provider is requested to undertake a self-evaluation of the programme against the individual Requirements under the
Standards for Education. This involves stating whether each Requirement is ‘met’, ‘partly met’ or ‘not met’ and to provide evidence in support of
their evaluation. The inspection panel examines this evidence, may request further documentary evidence and gathers further evidence from
discussions with staff and students. The panel will reach a decision on each Requirement, using the following descriptors:
A Requirement is met if:
“There is sufficient appropriate evidence derived from the inspection process. This evidence provides the inspectors with broad confidence that
the provider demonstrates the Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students is supportive of documentary
evidence and the evidence is robust, consistent and not contradictory. There may be minor deficiencies in the evidence supplied but these are
likely to be inconsequential.”

1

http://www.gdc-uk.org/Aboutus/education/Documents/Standards%20for%20Education.pdf

26

A Requirement is partly met if:
“Evidence derived from the inspection process is either incomplete or lacks detail and, as such, fails to convince the inspection panel that the
provider fully demonstrates the Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students may not fully support the evidence
submitted or there may be contradictory information in the evidence provided. There is, however, some evidence of compliance and it is likely
that either (a) the appropriate evidence can be supplied in a short time frame, or, (b) any deficiencies identified can be addressed and
evidenced in the annual monitoring process.”
A Requirement is not met if:
“The provider cannot provide evidence to demonstrate a Requirement or the evidence provided is not convincing. The information gathered at
the inspection through meetings with staff and students does not support the evidence provided or the evidence is inconsistent and/or
incompatible with other findings. The deficiencies identified are such as to give rise to serious concern and will require an immediate action plan
from the provider. The consequences of not meeting a Requirement in terms of the overall sufficiency of a programme will depend upon the
compliance of the provider across the range of Requirements and the possible implications for public protection”
5. Inspection reports highlight areas of strength and draw attention to areas requiring improvement and development, including actions that are
required to be undertaken by the provider. Where an action is needed for a Requirement to be met, the term ‘must’ is used to describe the
obligation on the provider to undertake this action. For these actions the inspectors may stipulate a specific timescale by which the action must
be completed or when an update on progress must be provided. In their observations on the content of the report, the provider should confirm
the anticipated date by which these actions will be completed. Where an action would improve how a Requirement is met, the term ‘should’ is
used and for these actions there will be no due date stipulated. Providers will be asked to report on the progress in addressing the required
actions through the annual monitoring process. Serious concerns about a lack of progress may result in further inspections or other quality
assurance activity.
6. The QA team aims to send an initial draft of the inspection report to the provider within two months of the conclusion of the inspection. The
provider of the qualification has the opportunity to provide factual corrections on the draft report. Following the production of the final report the
provider is asked to submit observations on, or objections to, the report and the actions listed. Where the inspection panel have recommended
that the programme is sufficient for registration, the Council of the GDC have delegated responsibility to the GDC Registrar to consider the
recommendations of the panel. Should an inspection panel not be able to recommend ‘sufficiency’ or ‘approval’, the report and observations
would be presented to the Council of the GDC for consideration.
7. The final version of the report and the provider’s observations are published on the GDC website.

27

