Education Quality Assurance Inspection Report
Education
Programme/Award
Provider/Awarding
Body
University of Plymouth, Bachelor of Dental
Peninsula Dental School Surgery (BDS)
Outcome of Inspection

Inspection Date(s)

7-8 March 2019

Recommended that the BDS
continues to be sufficient for the
graduating cohort to register as a
dentist

*Full details of the inspection process can be found in the annex*
Inspection summary
Remit and purpose of inspection:

Inspection referencing the Standards for
Education to determine approval of the
award for the purpose of registration with
the GDC as a dentist

Requirements for risk-based
focus:
Learning Outcomes:

4, 9, 11, 13, 15 and 19

Programme inspection date(s):

7-8 March including post-inspection meeting

Inspection team:

John Vaughan (Chair and Non-registrant
Member)
Richard Jones (Dentist Member)
Jo-Anne Taylor (Dentist Member)
Kathryn Counsell-Hubbard (GDC Staff
Member)

Preparing for Practice – dentistry

The BDS offered by the University of Plymouth is an exemplary programme which boasts
many areas of good practice. The programme enjoys a strong degree of autonomy regarding
some of its funding which is received into the dental school’s own company and can
therefore be utilized as the provider sees fit. The facilities both at the University and at their
dental education facilities (DEFs) have been established within the past 12 years, with some
DEFs being described as “state of the art”.
The exposure to patients from Year One was praised by the students as being one of the
best elements of the programme. Indeed, students reported that they felt the programme
excelled in comparison to descriptions of other programmes received from other BDS
students.
The staff with whom the panel met were enthusiastic and engaged not only with the
inspection process but with the running of the programme generally, and a positive
atmosphere prevails as a result.
Some areas of improvement were identified but the panel felt that attention to these areas
would only strengthen what is already a successful programme of study.
This inspection was a focused inspection based on specific Requirements from the
Standards for Education identified as part the risk assessment of the programme’s annual
monitoring return from 2018. All other requirements are considered to be met.
The panel wishes to thank the staff and students of Peninsula Dental School for their
hospitality and assistance both during and prior to the inspection.

Background and overview of Qualification
Annual intake
Programme duration
Format of programme
e.g.:
Year
1: basic knowledge, clinic
attendance, shadowing
2: knowledge and simulated
clinical experience
3: direct patient treatment
4-5: direct patient treatment,
clinic attendance, outreach,
placements

Number of providers
delivering the programme

58 students
176 (6600 hours) weeks over 5 years
The BDS programme offers a spiral, vertically and
horizontally integrated curriculum utilising a blend of
teaching and learning methods, which combine clinical
skills training with the acquisition of knowledge, skills and
professional attributes at all levels of the programme. All
teaching and learning activities are patient and studentcentred, and provide opportunities for authentic and
contextual learning.
Modules comprise integrated dental science and applied
dental knowledge, clinical dentistry, professional
development, critical appraisal and inter-professional
engagement:
Year:
1: basic knowledge, simulated clinical experience, clinic
attendance, direct contact with patients, communication
skills, social engagement. Student clinics in Devonport
(Plymouth) DEF.
2: basic knowledge, simulated clinical experience, clinic
attendance, direct patient treatment, team working, social
engagement, specialist care. Student clinics in Devonport
(Plymouth) DEF.
3: applied knowledge, clinic attendance, direct patient
treatment, team working, social engagement, specialist
care. Student clinics in Exeter DEF.
4: applied knowledge, clinic attendance, direct patient
treatment, team working, social engagement, treatment
planning, specialist care. Year 4 students based in Truro for
academic year.
5: applied knowledge, implementation & consolidation of
skills, clinic attendance, direct patient treatment, team
working, social engagement, treatment planning. Year 5
student clinics in Derriford (Plymouth) DEF.
The vast majority of placements are in one of the School’s
four Dental Education Facilities (DEFs), operated by
Peninsula Dental Social Enterprise (PDSE) in close
collaboration with the Dental School. These facilities have
been designed and built specifically to meet the needs of
dental students and are integrated with local NHS dental
care provision, to allow students to gain experience of both
routine and specialist, dental care, in a primary care setting.
PDSE is accountable to University quality assurance
processes with close communication and reporting via
School and Faculty Committees.
There are a very small number of 'specialist visits' to key
local Salaried Dental Service and Secondary Care
Providers.

Outcome of relevant Requirements1
Standard One
1

Met

2

Met

3

Met

4

Met

5

Met

6

Met

7

Met

8

Met
Standard Two

9

Met

10

Met

11

Partly Met

12

Met
Standard Three

1

13

Met

14

Met

15

Met

16

Met

17

Met

18

Met

19

Met

20

Met

21

Met

All Requirements within the Standards for Education are applicable for all programmes unless otherwise
stated. Specific requirements will be examined through inspection activity and will be identified via risk
analysis processes or due to current thematic reviews.

Standard 1 – Protecting patients
Providers must be aware of their duty to protect the public. Providers must ensure that
patient safety is paramount and care of patients is of an appropriate standard. Any risk
to the safety of patients and their care by students must be minimised.
Requirement 1: Students must provide patient care only when they have demonstrated
adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical procedures, the student should be
assessed as competent in the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 2: Providers must have systems in place to inform patients that they may
be treated by students and the possible implications of this. Patient agreement to
treatment by a student must be obtained and recorded prior to treatment commencing.
(Requirement Met)
Requirement 3: Students must only provide patient care in an environment which is
safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with relevant legislation and
requirements regarding patient care, including equality and diversity, wherever
treatment takes place. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 4: When providing patient care and services, providers must ensure that
students are supervised appropriately according to the activity and the student’s stage
of development. (Requirement Met)
The processes for supervising students and grading their work is fully described in the course
handbook. This is an overarching document for the entire programme but also clearly defines
what students cover at each stage of the course, meaning that supervisors may easily
orientate themselves with the skills that students should be able to perform. Further to this, the
periods in clinic are clearly delineated across year groups so it is easy to track which year
group is at which facility at any given time. Students also work in pairs and as such have inbuilt support should they need to inform a supervisor that they cannot complete an element of
the treatment plan.
The provider has established the Peninsula Dental Social Enterprise (PDSE) which is the body
that runs their four dental education facilities (DEFs). Three of the board members for PDSE
are also members of the senior management team that governs the programme, which means
there is considerable control exerted on the DEFs. The supervision ratios are therefore
specified by the provider and overseen not only by PDSE board members but by DEF-specific
clinical leads. The provider’s own policies and internal governance procedures are in use
across the DEFs, which assures standardisation across all sites.
The staffing on the DEF sites is consistent with the same clinical supervisors attending on the
same days. This allows for some consistency in the student experience. Nursing support is
also consistent across DEFs as is access to the clinical recording system, ADB (Assessment
Database).
For non-PDSE placements, the provider has a dedicated member of staff who oversees these
placements. This member of staff visits the placements each year to ensure that the
supervision provided, as well as other elements of the placement, are in place.
Despite the information provided and the positive feedback received from students, the panel
were still concerned by the different information received about the exact supervisor:student
ratio. This was stated as being 1:6 by the senior management team but students reported that

this can often be 1:7 or 1:8. It was not clear whether ratios differ depending on the complexity
of the procedure undertaken, nor whether the “floating” supervisor was on-site at all times. The
provider also advised that some former students have returned to the school in the role of
clinical supervisors. Such clinical supervisors are subject to an interview process but are only
required to have two years’ experience of clinical work. While this was not identified as an
issue by students, the placement of these supervisors did cause concern as the panel were
informed on one instance that new supervisors only work with Year One students while they
were informed on another occasion that only experienced supervisors are used for Year One.
This lack of clarity and consistency did cause some concern. A clear policy on the placement
and mentoring of inexperienced clinical teachers would have assisted the panel and may be of
use as a guide for staff.
However, the issues found by the panel were not supported by student feedback. Students did
not report any difficulties in the supervision they had received or any lack of support while on
clinic. Equally, the documentation provided showed sufficient staffing levels. These elements
were found to outweigh the concerns felt by the panel, and they found the requirement to be
met.
Requirement 5: Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained. This should
include training in equality and diversity legislation relevant for the role. Clinical
supervisors must have appropriate general or specialist registration with a UK
regulatory body. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 6: Providers must ensure that students and all those involved in the
delivery of education and training are aware of their obligation to raise concerns if they
identify any risks to patient safety and the need for candour when things go wrong.
Providers should publish policies so that it is clear to all parties how concerns should
be raised and how these concerns will be acted upon. Providers must support those
who do raise concerns and provide assurance that staff and students will not be
penalised for doing so. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 7: Systems must be in place to identify and record issues that may affect
patient safety. Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be taken by
the provider and where necessary the relevant regulatory body should be notified.
(Requirement Met)
Requirement 8: Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and apply as
required. The content and significance of the student fitness to practise procedures
must be conveyed to students and aligned to GDC Student Fitness to Practise
Guidance. Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar with the
GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance. Providers must also ensure that the GDC’s
Standard for the Dental Team are embedded within student training. (Requirement Met)

Standard 2 – Quality evaluation and review of the programme
The provider must have in place effective policy and procedures for the monitoring and
review of the programme.
Requirement 9: The provider must have a framework in place that details how it
manages the quality of the programme which includes making appropriate changes to
ensure the curriculum continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and adapts
to changing legislation and external guidance. There must be a clear statement about
where responsibility lies for this function. (Requirement Met)
A formal committee structure is in place to govern the quality of the programme. This is
supported by lower-level, informal mechanisms including a journal club for staff to share their
learning and the use of specialist leads when reviewing the curriculum. There are clinical leads
in each DEF who enjoy a close relationship with the senior management team.
The composition of the senior management team has changed as staff have left the
programme. The role of the former Director of Undergraduate Dental Studies has been split
between two existing members of staff to create new positions: Deputy Head of School and
Associate Head Teaching and Learning. The devolvement of the Director role has meant that
the oversight of the programme has increased to include three individuals, which the panel
found to be a positive change.
The panel were able to review several guidance documents which showed strong evidence of
mapping and blueprinting of the learning outcomes not only to the relevant parts of the
programme but to the assessments and programme timetable as well. Several members of
staff also described a continuous process of “self-audit” where the programme leads are
questioning what they do and why to ensure that the programme continues to deliver high
quality dental education.
External to the programme is the exemplary use of external examiners, who not only oversee
assessments but are also consulted regarding every module. An external examiner is
allocated to each module meaning that they become something akin to a subject specialist.
The programme is also subject to the University’s periodic review process which occurs every
five years.
The panel found the Requirement to be met and commend the provider for the amount of
information provided.
Requirement 10: Any concerns identified through the Quality Management framework,
including internal and external reports relating to quality, must be addressed as soon
as possible and the GDC notified of serious threats to students achieving the learning
outcomes. The provider will have systems in place to quality assure placements.
(Requirement Met)
Requirement 11: Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external quality
assurance procedures. External quality assurance should include the use of external
examiners, who should be familiar with the GDC learning outcomes and their context
and QAA guidelines should be followed where applicable. Patient and/or customer
feedback must be collected and used to inform programme development. (Requirement
Partly Met)
The panel were tasked with examining the patient and student feedback elements of this
Requirement. An exceptional amount of documentation was provided which fully evidenced an
engaged student body. The feedback from students is collected in multiple ways and utilised
for examining all facets of the programme. During meetings with students, the panel received

universally positive feedback accompanied by examples of changes to the programme as a
direct result of feedback.
Programme leads advised the panel that there are some measures for gathering patient
feedback in place but that a pilot system is scheduled to begin in September. At present,
patients have the option to complete the NHS ‘friends and family’ test or else leave their
comments in a dedicated book at the reception of the DEFs. A patient panel meeting (Patient
as Educator Focus Group) was also held in 2018 to gather insight into service users’
experiences. This meeting does not appear to be have been repeated in 2019 to date but did
yield important information regarding student attributes, areas of good practice and areas for
improvement.
Evidence of the collation of patient feedback was provided following the inspection and this
demonstrated a clear analysis of the data. However, all the evidence received by the panel
regarding patient feedback suggests that this process is used to inform service delivery and
formative learning for the students rather than being utilised for a deeper analysis of how any
potentially negative feedback could be addressed through core teaching.
A key weakness in patient feedback currently collected is that it does not allow for specific
feedback for individual students. Introducing a system that collects that kind of detail could not
only better inform students about their clinical and interpersonal skills, but could also
emphasise the importance of patient feedback, an understanding of which was not strongly
evident during meetings with students.
The panel were provided with additional evidence following the inspection, including evidence
on the Peninsula Patient Reported Experience Measure. This system is to be commended as
it allows for the feedback collected to be disseminated back to students for discussion.
The panel were content that the majority of the Requirement is met and recognise the
provider’s work in utilising what information they are currently able to collect. However, until a
method of gathering patient feedback is implemented that allows for analysis relating to
programme development, this Requirement can only be considered to be partly met.
Requirement 12: The provider must have effective systems in place to quality assure
placements where students deliver treatment to ensure that patient care and student
assessment across all locations meets these Standards. The quality assurance systems
should include the regular collection of student and patient feedback relating to
placements. (Requirement Met)

Standard 3– Student assessment
Assessment must be reliable and valid. The choice of assessment method must be
appropriate to demonstrate achievement of the GDC learning outcomes. Assessors
must be fit to perform the assessment task.
Requirement 13: To award the qualification, providers must be assured that students
have demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes, and that they
are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner. Evidence must be provided that
demonstrates this assurance, which should be supported by a coherent approach to the
principles of assessment referred to in these standards. (Requirement Met)
Assurance of student attainment was strongly evidenced. The systems for mapping the
programme to the learning outcomes, for monitoring ongoing student achievement and the
sign-up process were all found to be robust and underpinned by effective use of IT. The central

recording database (Assessment Database – ADB) utilised is entirely the provider’s own
design and they have therefore been able to control every facet of the system to ensure
effective recording.
Ongoing monitoring not only considers the overall attainment of students, which is graded, but
their exposure to clinical skills. The review of the information on ADB is supported by regular
meetings with academic tutors. These meetings allow the students to pinpoint areas of
challenge and to devise pathways for meeting those challenges with the tutor.
The provider makes effective use of a series of forms which they utilise to record pre-clinical
skills, patient interaction, remediation, professionalism and reflection. The principal forms were
the Form S, which details patient interactions, and the Form T, which reflects the student’s
coverage of the competencies expected for each year of the programme. both forms directly
feed into ongoing monitoring, progression and sign-up to final exams. Both Forms are digitised
on ADB meaning that multiple members of the programme team, as well as the student
themselves, can access them when required.
The panel were also particularly impressed with the remediation process. This utilises Form H,
which is completed immediately upon a supervisor observing a student completing a procedure
outside of the required standard. The Form triggers a process whereby the student is
immediately barred from practising that skill in clinic and a remediation session is held within
two weeks. The remediated skill is tested in the skills laboratory before the student may
practice that skill again in clinic.
The provider utilises numbers to govern how much clinical experience the students must
complete, which are detailed in the programme handbook. These targets are arrived at
following discussions amongst the senior management team utilising professional knowledge
and a strong external awareness of industry standards, changes and trends. The senior
management team reported that there is continuous questioning as to the appropriateness of
set targets.
The panel found this Requirement to be met and commend the provider on their innovative
practices and effective use of IT.
Requirement 14: The provider must have in place management systems to plan, monitor
and centrally record the assessment of students, including the monitoring of clinical
and/or technical experience, throughout the programme against each of the learning
outcomes. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 15: Students must have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and should undertake each activity relating to patient care on
sufficient occasions to enable them to develop the skills and the level of competency to
achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes. (Requirement Met)
The clinical targets set for this programme are clear and well-understood by the students
interviewed. Students reported enjoying the autonomy that managing their own patient
caseload gives them. The provider has made great efforts to recruit patients to ensure an
effective supply. While students may share patient treatment to a degree, whole patient care is
practised meaning that students will be responsible for the patient in their entirety as opposed
to completed discrete procedures to address gaps in their clinical experience. Students
reported that they understand the importance of providing holistic and continuing care for
patients and it was clear they do not view patients as “targets” for practice. These values are to
be commended.

The panel were able to examine student data and were satisfied that sufficient experience for
all students at their various stages of the programme is being achieved. Overall, this
Requirement is met but there were some areas that the panel felt it was important to comment
on for the provider’s own development.
Some students reported a long delay between acquiring a skill in the skills laboratory and
actually practicing that skill on a patient. This delay was borne out by the programme timetable.
Students also reported that this delay can be exacerbated as ‘junior’ students can feel
pressured to share their patients with ‘senior’ students to allow those senior students to gain
the competencies they require. Due to the way in which patients are allocated and the clinical
experience is managed, this can lead to lack of confidence and possible de-skilling on the part
of the junior students.
The case mix of patients could also be better examined to ensure that patients do require a
sufficient amount or type of treatment so that students are not accruing multiple instances of a
skill over the required target whilst struggling in other areas. This is a challenge for all
providers but the panel wanted to draw this provider’s attention to the issue as they felt that the
assistance given to students in managing and sharing patients could be improved. Earlier
recognition and support to re-allocate case load to address students’ learning needs could
avoid pressure later in the programme.
Requirement 16: Providers must demonstrate that assessments are fit for purpose and
deliver results which are valid and reliable. The methods of assessment used must be
appropriate to the learning outcomes, in line with current and best practice and be
routinely monitored, quality assured and developed. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 17: Assessment must utilise feedback collected from a variety of sources,
which should include other members of the dental team, peers, patients and/or
customers. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 18: The provider must support students to improve their performance by
providing regular feedback and by encouraging students to reflect on their practice.
(Requirement Met)
Requirement 19: Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills, experience and
training to undertake the task of assessment, including appropriate general or specialist
registration with a UK regulatory body. Examiners/ assessors should have received
training in equality and diversity relevant for their role. (Requirement Met)
The registration and ongoing training of supervisors, such as basic life support and equality
and diversity, is monitored by the provider. Supervisors must adhere to a code of conduct
which includes the attendance at three training sessions with the school. Six sessions are run
from the dental school throughout the year, and opportunities to join the meetings via Skype
are offered to attendees at different sites or with other commitments. Supervisors are
remunerated and given a certificate of continuing professional development for their
attendance. This was considered to be an inclusive and accessible way for staff to update their
skills, experience and training relative to their role within education.
The training and initial induction provided by the school is supplemented by the reference
material available at the DEFs on how to assess students. Supervisors must grade students
and provide written feedback for every patient contact on the Form S. This is completed on the
ADB which has the capability to produce reports enabling the provider to isolate the grades
and who awarded them, which assists with work to identify inconsistency in assessment. This
work will be added to when the new clinical recording system Form2 completes its rollout over
the next four years.

The panel were very impressed with the staff training in place which allows for regular
calibration. This Requirement was therefore found to be met.
Requirement 20: Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent to which
assessment processes are rigorous, set at the correct standard, ensure equity of
treatment for students and have been fairly conducted. The responsibilities of the
external examiners must be clearly documented. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 21: Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear criteria. The
standard expected of students in each area to be assessed must be clear and students
and staff involved in assessment must be aware of this standard. An appropriate
standard setting process must be employed for summative assessments. (Requirement
Met)

Summary of Action
Req.
number
11

Action

Observations & response from Provider

Due date

The provider must implement a process for
analysing the data received via patient
feedback and feed this into programme
review.

Thank you for your observations on our process for
analysing patient data to inform curriculum
development. The existing processes are summarised
below, but we will review these in light of your
comments and provide an update in annual monitoring.

Annual monitoring
2020/21

Broad sweep: PDSE produce a report after each
running of the patient satisfaction questionnaire, which
is discussed at the 6 weekly Dental Clinical Quality and
Standards Committee (DCQSC). This feedbacks via
the Director of Clinical Dentistry to make changes to the
clinical curriculum in consultation with Clinical Leads,
Year Leads, SDLE Lead and Clinical Supervisors.
Mid-range: patient focus group data are thematically
analysed and discussed at DCQSC, with reference to
curriculum development and/or staff (clinical supervisor)
training. Year leads consider the analysis with
reference to informing individual teaching and learning
sessions in the appropriate year of study, and the
clinical supervisors are informed of the analysis for
feedback and development.
Individual student feedback: students discuss the
feedback with their Academic Tutor in their termly
meetings. Any generic comments are reported at the
Student and Curriculum Performance Review Group by
tutors and fed back to the curriculum team for review
and action.

Observations from the provider on content of report
Thank you for this very positive and supportive report, which once again recognises our commitment to the careful development of our BDS
programme and encourages our team in the further enhancement of the student experience and quality of education.
We were delighted that the inspection team were impressed with so many aspects of the School’s work, and we were pleased to see the
School has met 20 of the 21 requirements, with the remaining requirement partly met. We will focus our attentions on improving this aspect of
the management and development of our programme and look forward to reporting on our progress in due course.
We would like to extend our sincere thanks to the inspection team for their encouragement and very constructive support.

Recommendations to the GDC
Education associates’ recommendation

Qualification continues to be sufficient for holders to apply for registration as a
dentist with the General Dental Council

Date of reinspection / next regular monitoring exercise
[Delete as applicable]

Regular monitoring in 2020/21

Annex 1
Inspection purpose and process

1. As part of its duty to protect patients and promote high standards within the professions it
regulates, the General Dental Council (GDC) quality assures the education and training of
student dentists and dental care professionals (DCPs) at institutions whose qualifications
enable the holder to apply for registration with the GDC. It also quality assures new
qualifications where it is intended that the qualification will lead to registration. The aim of
this quality assurance activity is to ensure that institutions produce a new registrant who has
demonstrated, on graduation, that they have met the learning outcomes required for
registration with the GDC. This ensures that students who obtain a qualification leading to
registration are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner.
2. Inspections are a key element of the GDC’s quality assurance activity. They enable a
recommendation to be made to the Council of the GDC regarding the ‘sufficiency’ of the
programme for registration as a dentist and ‘approval’ of the programme for registration as a
dental care professional. The GDC’s powers are derived under Part II, Section 9 of the
Dentists Act 1984 (as amended).
3. The GDC document ‘Standards for Education’ 2nd edition1 is the framework used to
evaluate qualifications. There are 21 Requirements in three distinct Standards, against
which each qualification is assessed.
4. The education provider is requested to undertake a self-evaluation of the programme
against the individual Requirements under the Standards for Education. This involves stating
whether each Requirement is ‘met’, ‘partly met’ or ‘not met’ and to provide evidence in
support of their evaluation. The inspection panel examines this evidence, may request
further documentary evidence and gathers further evidence from discussions with staff and
students. The panel will reach a decision on each Requirement, using the following
descriptors:
A Requirement is met if:
“There is sufficient appropriate evidence derived from the inspection process. This evidence
provides the inspectors with broad confidence that the provider demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students is supportive of
documentary evidence and the evidence is robust, consistent and not contradictory. There
may be minor deficiencies in the evidence supplied but these are likely to be
inconsequential.”
A Requirement is partly met if:
“Evidence derived from the inspection process is either incomplete or lacks detail and, as
such, fails to convince the inspection panel that the provider fully demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students may not fully
support the evidence submitted or there may be contradictory information in the evidence
provided. There is, however, some evidence of compliance and it is likely that either (a) the
appropriate evidence can be supplied in a short time frame, or, (b) any deficiencies identified
can be addressed and evidenced in the annual monitoring process.”
A Requirement is not met if:

“The provider cannot provide evidence to demonstrate a Requirement or the evidence
provided is not convincing. The information gathered at the inspection through meetings with
staff and students does not support the evidence provided or the evidence is inconsistent
and/or incompatible with other findings. The deficiencies identified are such as to give rise to
serious concern and will require an immediate action plan from the provider. The
consequences of not meeting a Requirement in terms of the overall sufficiency of a
programme will depend upon the compliance of the provider across the range of
Requirements and the possible implications for public protection”
5. Inspection reports highlight areas of strength and draw attention to areas requiring
improvement and development, including actions that are required to be undertaken by the
provider. Where an action is needed for a Requirement to be met, the term ‘must’ is used to
describe the obligation on the provider to undertake this action. For these actions the
inspectors may stipulate a specific timescale by which the action must be completed or when
an update on progress must be provided. In their observations on the content of the report,
the provider should confirm the anticipated date by which these actions will be completed.
Where an action would improve how a Requirement is met, the term ‘should’ is used and for
these actions there will be no due date stipulated. Providers will be asked to report on the
progress in addressing the required actions through the annual monitoring process. Serious
concerns about a lack of progress may result in further inspections or other quality
assurance activity.
6. The QA team aims to send an initial draft of the inspection report to the provider within two
months of the conclusion of the inspection. The provider of the qualification has the
opportunity to provide factual corrections on the draft report. Following the production of the
final report the provider is asked to submit observations on, or objections to, the report and
the actions listed. Where the inspection panel have recommended that the programme is
sufficient for registration, the Council of the GDC have delegated responsibility to the GDC
Registrar to consider the recommendations of the panel. Should an inspection panel not be
able to recommend ‘sufficiency’ or ‘approval’, the report and observations would be
presented to the Council of the GDC for consideration.
7. The final version of the report and the provider’s observations are published on the GDC
website.

