INSPECTION REPORT
Education Provider /
Awarding Body:

Universities of Plymouth and Exeter (2009-2012
cohorts)
Plymouth University (2013 cohort onwards)

Programme / Award /
Qualification:

Bachelor in Dental Surgery (BDS)

Remit and Purpose:

Full inspection referencing the Standards for
Education to determine the continuing
sufficiency of the award for the purpose of
registration with the GDC as a dentist

Learning Outcomes:

Preparing for Practice (Dentist)

Programme Inspection Dates:

3 & 4 April 2014

Examination Inspection
Dates:

7 May 2014 and 5 & 6 June 2014
(28 May 2014 – Student Sign-up Meeting)
(18 June 2014 – Examination Board Meeting)

Inspection Panel:

Cindy Mackie (Chair and Lay Member)
Steven Farmer (Dentist Member)
Michael Fenlon (Dentist Member)
Alan Gilmour (Dentist Member)

GDC Staff:

James Marshall (Lead)
Luke Melia

Outcome:

Recommended that the Universities of Plymouth
and Exeter / Plymouth University BDS
Programme remains sufficient for registration as
a dentist

Inspection summary
The inspection panel was pleased with the comprehensiveness of the documentation
received in advance of the inspection and found that the evidence demonstrating each
Requirement was easy to find. Requests for additional information throughout the inspection
process were acted upon in a timely fashion.
The panel was impressed with the strong and motivational leadership skills that were evident
within the School, together with a cohesive team approach amongst all of the staff involved
in the delivery of the learning outcomes, assessment and administration of the programme.
The panel noted there was a visible adherence to policies and practices in place, which was
evident in audit trails relating to patient safety, assessment, quality assurance, fitness to
practise, supervision and diversity.
The panel felt the establishment of the community outreach programme is an excellent
model in enabling student’s access to a wide range of patients and challenges in respect of
clinical treatment, patient care and services. It also develops students in terms of their social
awareness, respect for diversity and communication skills.
The panel noted positive student feedback with regard to the programme in terms of support,
supervision and action within the school following review feedback from cohort
representatives.
The inspectors had no major concerns with the programme, though there are some areas
where it was felt that improvements could be made. The programme is well organised and
ensures thorough assessment of students across the learning outcomes contained within the
GDC publication ‘Preparing for Practice’.
The inspectors could clearly see development of students as they moved through the
programme stages and were satisfied that upon graduation the students were fit to practise
as safe beginners.
The panel wishes to thank the staff, students, and external stakeholders involved with the
BDS programme for their co-operation and assistance with the inspection.

Inspection process and purpose of Inspection
1.

As part of its duty to protect patients and promote high standards within the professions
it regulates, the General Dental Council (GDC) quality assures the education and
training of student dentists and dental care professionals (DCPs) at institutions whose
qualifications enable the holder to apply for registration with the GDC and new
qualifications where it is intended that the qualification will lead to registration.

2.

The aim of this quality assurance activity is to ensure that these institutions produce a
new registrant who has demonstrated, on graduation, that he or she has met the
outcomes required for registration with the GDC. This is to ensure that students who
obtain a qualification leading to registration are fit to practise at the level of a safe
beginner.

3.

The inspection focuses on four Standards, with a total of 29 underlying Requirements.
These are contained in the document Standards for Education.

4.

The purpose of this inspection was to make a recommendation to the Council of the
GDC regarding the ‘sufficiency’ of the programme for registration as a dentist in the UK.
The GDC’s powers are derived under Part II, Section 9 of the Dentists Act 1984 (as
amended) to determine sufficiency of the programme.

5.

Inspection reports may highlight areas of strength and draw attention to areas requiring
improvement and development, including actions that are required to be undertaken by
the provider. Where an action is needed for a Requirement to be met, the term ‘must’ is
used to describe the obligation on the provider to undertake this action. For these
actions the inspectors may stipulate a specific timescale by which the action must be
completed or when an update on progress must be provided. In their observations on
the content of the report, the provider should confirm the anticipated date by which
these actions will be completed. Where an action would improve how a Requirement is
met, the term ‘should’ is used and for these actions there will be no due date stipulated.
Providers will be asked to report on the progress in addressing the required actions
through the annual monitoring process. Serious concerns about a lack of progress may
result in further inspections or other quality assurance activity.

6.

The provider of the qualification has the opportunity to provide factual corrections on the
draft report. Following the production of the final report the provider is asked to submit
observations on, or objections to, the report and the actions listed. Where the inspection
panel have recommended that the programme is sufficient for registration, the Council
of the GDC have delegated responsibility to the GDC Registrar to consider the
recommendations of the panel. Should an inspection panel not be able to recommend
sufficiency, the report and observations would be presented to the Council of the GDC
for consideration.

The Inspection
7.

This report sets out the findings of an inspection of the Bachelor of Dental Surgery
awarded by Universities of Plymouth and Exeter (2009-2012 cohorts) and Plymouth
University (2013 cohort onwards). The GDC publication Standards for Education
(version 1.0 November 2012) was used as a framework for the inspection. This
inspection forms part of a series BDS inspections being undertaken by the GDC 20122014.

8.

The inspection was comprised of five visits. The programme inspection was carried out
on 3 and 4 April. This involved a series of meetings with programme staff involved in the
management, delivery and assessment of the programme and a selection of BDS
students. The examination/student sign-off inspections took place on 7 May, 28 May, 5
and 6 June and 18 June.

9.

The report contains the findings of the inspection panel across the visits and with
consideration to supporting documentation prepared by the School to evidence how the
individual Requirements under the Standards for Education have been met.

Overview of Qualification
10. The BDS programme sits within the Peninsula Dental School of Plymouth University.
The graduate entry programme has an annual intake of 64 students. The duration of the
programme is 142 weeks over four years of study and training. The undergraduate entry
programme has an annual intake of 58 students. The duration of the programme is 179
weeks over five years of study and training. The Peninsula Dental School also offers a

BSc Dental Therapy and Hygiene programme and a NEBDN Dental Nursing
programme.
11. The majority of the students’ clinical experience takes place in the School’s Dental
Education Facilities, which are based in Exeter, Derriford, Devonport and Truro.
Students start clinics in month 6 of the course on one day a week rising to 4 days in
Year 4.
12. The BDS programme is delivered through a spiral curriculum, which utilises a range of
learning and teaching methods and is designed to combine the training of clinical skills
with knowledge acquisition.
13. The programme had been designed to meet the learning outcomes in GDC curriculum
document, Preparing for Practice, which was published in late 2011.

Evaluation of Qualification against the Standards for Education
14. As stated above, the Standards for Education were used as a framework for this
inspection.
15. The provider was requested to undertake a self-evaluation of the programme against
the individual Requirements under the Standards for Education. This involved stating
whether each Requirement is met, partly met or not met and to provide evidence in
support of their evaluation. The inspection panel examined this evidence, requested
further documentary evidence and gathered further evidence from discussions with staff
and students.
16. The inspection panel used the following descriptors to reach a decision on the extent to
which the Universities of Plymouth and Exeter/Plymouth University BDS meets each
Requirement:
A Requirement is met if:
“There is sufficient appropriate evidence derived from the inspection process. This
evidence provides the inspectors with broad confidence that the provider demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students is supportive
of documentary evidence and the evidence is robust, consistent and not contradictory.
There may be minor deficiencies in the evidence supplied but these are likely to be
inconsequential.”
A Requirement is partly met if:
“Evidence derived from the inspection process is either incomplete or lacks detail and, as
such, fails to convince the inspection panel that the provider fully demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students may not fully
support the evidence submitted or there may be contradictory information in the evidence
provided. There is, however, some evidence of compliance and it is likely that either (a) the
appropriate evidence can be supplied in a short time frame, or, (b) any deficiencies
identified can be addressed and evidenced in the annual monitoring process.”
A Requirement is not met if:
“The provider cannot provide evidence to demonstrate a Requirement or the evidence
provided is not convincing. The information gathered at the inspection through meetings

with staff and students does not support the evidence provided or the evidence is
inconsistent and/or incompatible with other findings. The deficiencies identified are such as
to give rise to serious concern and will require an immediate action plan from the provider.
The consequences of not meeting a Requirement in terms of the overall sufficiency of a
programme will depend upon the compliance of the provider across the range of
Requirements and the possible implications for public protection.

Standard 1 – Protecting patients
Providers must be aware of their duty to protect the public. Providers must ensure that
patient safety is paramount and care of patients is of an appropriate standard. Any risk
to the safety of patients and their care by students must be minimised
Requirements
Met
Partly Not
met
met
1. Students will provide patient care only when they have
demonstrated adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical

procedures, the student should be assessed as competent in
the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients
2. Patients must be made aware that they are being treated by
students and give consent



3. Students will only provide patient care in an environment
which is safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with
relevant legislation and requirements regarding patient care



4. When providing patient care and services, students are to be
supervised appropriately according to the activity and the
student’s stage of development.



5. Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained.
Clinical supervisors must have appropriate general or
specialist registration with a regulatory body



6. Students and those involved in the delivery of education and
training must be encouraged to raise concerns if they identify
any risks to patient safety



7. Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be
taken by the provider



8. Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and
apply as required. The content and significance of the student
fitness to practise procedures must be conveyed to students
and aligned to GDC student fitness to practise guidance. Staff
involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar
with the GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance.



GDC comments
Requirement 1: Students will provide patient care only when they have demonstrated
adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical procedures, the student should be
assessed as competent in the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients (Requirement Met)
The panel was provided with evidence of the Simulated Dental Learning Environment and was
impressed with its effectiveness in respect of supervision, assessment administration and
support. Students are required to attend the SDLE for one day each week during year one,
followed by one session each week in years two and three. Students and staff are provided
with timetables of all SDLE assessments and clear criteria and policies for how these
assessments will take place. There was a clear understanding of the content by both staff and
students.

Students are required to complete assessments for the majority of reversible and irreversible
treatments, which are recorded on the School’s Form A, prior to being permitted to carry out
the treatment on a patient. Students maintain a logbook of local anaesthesia treatments under
direct observation and are required to complete a minimum of ten to a satisfactory and safe
level and complete a final capability assessment before being permitted to carry out the
procedure under direct supervision. Students must also achieve 100% in the IRMER test prior
to taking any radiographs. Students maintain a logbook of radiographs under direct
observation and are required to complete a minimum of ten to a satisfactory and safe level and
complete a final capability assessment before being permitted to carry out the procedure
under direct supervision.
The panel was informed that if, during any clinical procedure, a student is given a borderline
Form S mark, remediation is given directly at the chair. If a student is given an unsatisfactory
mark then a Form H is completed and the student is prohibited from carrying out that particular
treatment until a remediation programme is successfully completed in the SDLE.
Requirement 2: Patients must be made aware that they are being treated by students
and give consent (Requirement Met)
During the inspection the panel was provided with examples of the patient information leaflets
and consent forms which patients are required to sign prior to receiving treatment from a
student. The panel was impressed with the clear and comprehensive nature of these forms.
The panel was also able to see information notices and posters for patients in and around the
clinical environment.
The panel was informed that students are required to wear name badges, which clearly state
their student status and this was triangulated during meetings with staff and students.
Requirement 3: Students will only provide patient care in an environment which is safe
and appropriate. The provider must comply with relevant legislation and requirements
regarding patient care (Requirement Met)
The panel was provided with evidence that all of the clinical environments used by students
have been inspected to a satisfactory level by the Care Quality Commission (CQC) in
September and October 2013.
The School reported that all clinical incidents are recorded online and the issues and
outcomes are reported to the University, faculty and the PDSE Health and Safety Committees.
The panel was also provided with policies detailing how clinical incidents must be recorded
and followed up.
The panel was pleased to see an assessment that is planned for Year 4 students as part of
the five-year BDS programme, where students complete an audit project and present this.
The panel felt this would enable the students to put the theory of audit into practice and help to
embed this skill throughout their career.
Requirement 4: When providing patient care and services, students are to be
supervised appropriately according to the activity and the student’s stage of
development (Requirement Met)
The panel was provided with evidence of clinic timetables and records of attendance showing
staff and student levels. The panel felt that the level of supervision provided was appropriate
according to the activity and student’s stage of development.

Requirement 5: Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained. Clinical
supervisors must have appropriate general or specialist registration with a regulatory
body (Requirement Met)
In order to work in the clinical environment at the School all supervising staff are required to
hold an honorary PDSE contract, which is re-issued each year. In addition to this staff must
be registered with the GDC, hold an up-to-date CRB check and have a local NHS performer’s
list number. Each year supervisors have an appraisal, which must be evidenced in order for
the supervisor to be issued with a new honorary contract. The panel had access to staff
appraisals and were encouraged by the approach taken to continuous professional
development.
The School has a thorough induction programme in place for all new clinical supervisors. New
clinical supervisors must also shadow experienced supervisors on the clinic until the Clinical
Lead is satisfied that the new clinical supervisor is competent and confident to work directly on
the clinic supervising independently. All supervisors are required to sign that they have read
the ‘Standards for Clinical Supervisors’ document.
The panel was pleased to see that the Dental Clinical Supervisors Quality Assurance Group
(DSCQAG) meets every 6 weeks during term-time where any issues can be discussed.
Clinical Supervisors are also required to attend an annual training day.
Requirement 6: Students and those involved in the delivery of education and training
must be encouraged to raise concerns if they identify any risks to patient safety
(Requirement Met)
The panel was informed that students are issued with the School’s ‘Raising Concerns’ policy,
the GDC’s raising concerns documentation annually, the School’s response to the Francis
Report has also been made available. The panel commended the School’s response to the
Francis Report, with a dedicated resource working on pertinent areas, and to its approach to
disseminating the lessons learnt in the report regularly to students and staff.
In addition to this at the start of every year each cohort of students are reminded of the
mechanisms available for raising concerns. The panel was satisfied during meetings with the
students that there was a clear understanding of the requirement to raise concerns if any risks
to patient safety were identified. The panel had sight of specific input designed and delivered
to student cohorts on the subject.
Requirement 7: Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be taken by
the provider (Requirement Met)
During the inspection the panel was provided with the log of incidents that have occurred and
the specific and timely actions the School has taken. Incidents that occur in the clinical
environment are initially managed by the Clinical Leads and Senior Nurses and appropriately
recorded and reported. The student or staff member involved in the incident will either be
remediated or suspended from the clinical environment, pending further investigation if
necessary. Students can be issued with Form P Unprofessional referral forms and could
potentially be subject to a full fitness to practice investigation.
When a student is issued with an unsatisfactory Form S during an assessment, the student
automatically enters the remediation programme and until this has been satisfactorily
completed the student is not permitted to carry out the procedure which caused the initial
concern on a patient.
Requirement 8: Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and apply as

required. The content and significance of the student fitness to practise procedures
must be conveyed to students and aligned to GDC student fitness to practise guidance.
Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar with the GDC Student
Fitness to Practise Guidance (Requirement Met)
The panel was provided with evidence of the School’s fitness to practise policy and
procedures, aligned to GDC guidance, which is circulated to all staff and students during
inductions and after the documents have been updated. The documents are also available on
the School’s electronic EMILY system. The panel was also provided with evidence of a
Fitness to Practise incident and the course of action followed within the school, from the
reporting stage through to the final outcome. There was a clear audit trail in terms of actions
taken and decision making and reflected clear adherence to the School policy.
During meetings with staff and students the panel felt that the students had a good
understanding of fitness to practice, however the panel was of the opinion that amongst some
members of staff there was a lack of full understanding of the School’s fitness to practise
policies and procedures, when applied to their specific role and felt this could be further
integrated into staff inductions and training in the future. Staff discussed the term
‘professionalism’ and were familiar with standards, however greater understanding of fitness to
practise guidance would be of benefit in the future.
Actions
Req.
Number

Actions for the provider
None

Due date
(if applicable)

Standard 2 – Quality evaluation and review of the programme
The provider must have in place effective policy and procedures for the monitoring and
review of the programme
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
9. The provider will have a framework in place that details how it
manages the quality of the programme which includes

making appropriate changes to ensure the curriculum
continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and
adapts to changing legislation and external guidance. There
must be a clear statement about where responsibility lies for
this function
10. The provider will have systems in place to quality assure
placements
11. Any problems identified through the operation of the quality
management framework must be addressed as soon as
possible
12. Should quality evaluation of the programme identify any
serious threats to the students achieving learning outcomes
through the programme, the GDC must be notified at the
earliest possible opportunity







13. Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external
quality assurance procedures



14. External examiners must be utilised and must be familiar with
the learning outcomes and their context. Providers should
follow QAA guidelines on external examining where
applicable



15. Providers must consider and, where appropriate, act upon
concerns raised or formal reports on the quality of education
and assessment



GDC comments
Requirement 9: The provider will have a framework in place that details how it manages
the quality of the programme which includes making appropriate changes to ensure the
curriculum continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and adapts to
changing legislation and external guidance. There must be a clear statement about
where responsibility lies for this function (Requirement Met)
While the panel was satisfied that the School had acceptable frameworks in place to manage
the quality of both the graduate entry and undergraduate BDS programmes, they felt the
complexity of the current quality management arrangement could lead to confusion and errors
could arise. However, the panel felt confident that when the School facilitates the single
undergraduate programme this area of risk should be minimised.
In its current format, the quality management of programmes is split between the Joint
Approval and Review Board (JARB), which oversees the graduate entry four year BDS
programme in collaboration with Plymouth University and Exeter University and the Plymouth
University Peninsula School of Medicine and Dentistry (PUPSMD) Faculty Board, which

oversees the undergraduate five year BDS programme.
The panel was provided with evidence that the School undertakes an annual review for both
the JARB and PUPSMD Faculty Board, to enable monitoring of both the graduate and
undergraduate programmes. In the event of the School needing to make any changes to
modules then the JARB and PUPSMD Faculty Board would be required to approve
amendments to their respective programmes. The School informed the panel that the GDC
would be informed of any changes to the programme, where relevant.
Requirement 10: The provider will have systems in place to quality assure placements
(Requirement Met)
The School only has a limited number of external placements, with the vast majority of the
student experience taking place in the School’s primary dental care dental education facilities
(DEFs).
The panel was satisfied with the policies and procedures in place to ensure quality is
maintained in the placements and was also of the view there would be benefit in having a
stronger formalised communication strategy with external placement providers. The panel was
also provided with evidence of CQC inspection reports and was informed that all placement
providers are issued with honorary contracts from the University. The School also undertakes
a programme of annual visits with the practice placements and evidence of this was made
available to the panel.
Requirement 11: Any problems identified through the operation of the quality
management framework must be addressed as soon as possible (Requirement Met)
The panel was provided with evidence of the structure of the School’s quality management
structure and how any problems identified would be addressed by the School’s Senior
Management Team (SMT) and the Peninsula Dental School Social Enterprise (PDSE) Board.
The panel was satisfied that the School had mechanisms in place to escalate problems that
are identified expediently to either the JARB for the graduate entry programme or the
PUPSMD Faculty Board for the undergraduate BDS programme.
Requirement 12: Should quality evaluation of the programme identify any serious
threats to the students achieving learning outcomes through the programme, the GDC
must be notified at the earliest possible opportunity (Requirement Met)
The panel was satisfied that there had not been any recent serious threats to the student’s
achieving learning outcomes through the programme and were reassured that the School had
policies and procedures in place to ensure that threats would be escalated through the quality
management framework, should they occur, and that the GDC would be notified of these
threats.
The panel was informed that the Director of Undergraduate Dental Studies attends the
Plymouth University Teaching and Learning Committee meetings and the Head of School
attends the JARB meetings, ensuring that threats that may occur from either the
undergraduate or graduate entry programmes are covered appropriately.
Requirement 13: Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external quality
assurance procedures (Requirement Met)
The panel was satisfied that both the undergraduate and graduate entry programmes are
subject to rigorous internal and external quality assurance procedures. During the inspection

the panel had an opportunity to meet the School’s three external examiners and the external
advisor. The panel was impressed with the input the external examiners and external advisor
have had on the programme and was provided with evidence of external examiner reports
detailing their feedback.
The School also undergoes a Periodic Review by the University, which takes place every five
years. The next Periodic Review for the Dental School was scheduled to take place in 2014
and the panel looks forward to the results of this. As noted in Requirement 9, an Annual
Review / Action Plan is prepared each year for the Teaching, Learning and Quality Committee
and the JARB respectively.
The panel was also informed that the School had performed favourably in a recent student
survey, a view which was echoed during meetings with students of all years that were
undertaken as part of the inspection. Students were confident that any issues they raised
were listened to and acted upon.
Requirement 14: External examiners must be utilised and must be familiar with the
learning outcomes and their context. Providers should follow QAA guidelines on
external examining where applicable (Requirement Met)
The panel was provided with a copy of the School’s Code of Practice for External Examiners
and was also given sight of the University External Examiner Conference for 2014. All
external examiners at the School are required to attend university training days and attend
Subject Assessment Panels for the modules they are appointed to in addition to attending the
Progress and Award Board. The panel saw evidence of the external examiners reports and
were satisfied with the level of feedback provided, the panel would encourage specific,
measureable and detailed feedback in external examiner / advisor reports.
During the examination inspection, which took place in May and June 2014, the panel had an
opportunity to observe the external examiners during the integrated structured clinical
examinations (ISCEs) and case presentations and were satisfied that both the School and the
external examiners were following QAA guidelines throughout the process.
Requirement 15: Providers must consider and, where appropriate, act upon concerns
raised or formal reports on the quality of education and assessment (Requirement Met)
Following previous GDC inspection reports, the School has been able to demonstrate
effectively that concerns raised regarding the quality of education and assessment are acted
upon and addressed. The panel was satisfied that the School meets this requirement.
Actions
Req.
Number

Actions for the provider
None

Due date
(if applicable)

Standard 3– Student assessment
Assessment must be reliable and valid. The choice of assessment method must be
appropriate to demonstrate achievement of the GDC learning outcomes. Assessors
must be fit to perform the assessment task
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
16. To award the qualification, providers must be assured that
students have demonstrated attainment across the full range

of learning outcomes, at a level sufficient to indicate they are
safe to begin practice. This assurance should be underpinned
by a coherent approach to aggregation and triangulation, as
well as the principles of assessment referred to in these
standards.
17. The provider will have in place management systems to plan,
monitor and record the assessment of students throughout
the programme against each of the learning outcomes



18. Assessment must involve a range of methods appropriate to
the learning outcomes and these should be in line with
current practice and routinely monitored, quality assured and
developed



19. Students will have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and will undertake each activity relating
to patient care on sufficient occasions to enable them to
develop the skills and the level of competency to achieve the
relevant GDC learning outcomes
20. The provider should seek to improve student performance by
encouraging reflection and by providing feedback1.
21. Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills,
experience and training to undertake the task of assessment,
appropriate general or specialist registration with a regulatory
body







22. Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent
to which assessment processes are rigorous, set at the
correct standard, ensure equity of treatment for students and
have been fairly conducted



23. Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear
criteria. Standard setting must be employed for summative
assessments



24. Where appropriate, patient/peer/customer feedback
should contribute to the assessment process
25. Where possible, multiple samples of performance must
be taken to ensure the validity and reliability of the
assessment conclusion

1





Reflective practice should not be part of the assessment process in a way that risks effective student use

26. The standard expected of students in each area to be
assessed must be clear and students and staff involved
in assessment must be aware of this standard



GDC comments
Requirement 16: To award the qualification, providers must be assured that students
have demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes, at a level
sufficient to indicate they are safe to begin practice. This assurance should be
underpinned by a coherent approach to aggregation and triangulation, as well as the
principles of assessment referred to in these standards (Requirement Met)
The panel was informed that the School carries out an assessment mapping exercise on
an annual basis for each module to ensure they are appropriately and sufficiently mapped
to the GDCs learning outcomes. The panel was also provided with evidence of where and
how each of the learning outcomes were assessed. The panel was pleased with the work
carried out by the School since the initial GDC inspections, which enabled the panel to
clearly identify at which point in both the graduate entry and undergraduate entry
programmes the assessment of learning outcomes takes place.
The School adopts a range of assessment methods, including multiple choice questions,
applied dental knowledge (ADK) questions, case presentations, unseen case
assessments and an integrated structured clinical examination (ISCE). The ADK
examination is set at the level of a qualified and registered Foundation Dentist, to ensure
that the students are assessed to a robust standard.
Student’s assessment results are recorded on the School’s assessment database (ADB)
as soon as an assessment is complete, enabling both staff and students to track progress
in ‘real-time’, which allows staff to flag up any problems or issues with a student as soon
as they arise. The student’s ADB portfolio of clinical experience is also discussed during
the regular portfolio appraisals (RPA).
In the event of a student achieving the required number of credits but leaving the
programme before graduation, they can be awarded a BSc in Oral Health Science, which
does not permit registration with the GDC.
Requirement 17: The provider will have in place management systems to plan, monitor
and record the assessment of students throughout the programme against each of the
learning outcomes (Requirement Met)
The panel agreed that the School makes excellent use of its Assessment Database (ADB),
which is the central recording and monitoring system for all students. The ADB can be
accessed by both students and staff, enabling all members of the team to monitor and review
progress throughout the programme. The ADB is used during students RPAs to enable
learning plans to be developed, when needed. The ADB also enables the School to produce
progress reports on individual students or the cohort as a whole. The panel discussed the
recording of assessment and clinical attainment data with the students, who responded
positively. The students felt that having access to their progress records whenever they
wanted was extremely beneficial and assisted in their ongoing learning and development.
The programme Module Records detail where each Preparing for Practice learning outcome is
mapped to each module, enabling the School to ensure the learning outcomes are adequately
taught and assessed for each student and for the cohort as a whole.
Requirement 18: Assessment must involve a range of methods appropriate to the

learning outcomes and these should be in line with current practice and routinely
monitored, quality assured and developed (Requirement Met)
During the inspection the panel was presented with evidence of the range of assessment
methods used in the BDS programme. The panel was satisfied that the range of assessments
was appropriate to the learning outcomes. The panel was particularly impressed with the final
year ISCE assessment, which they felt was organised and administrated in a very professional
manner. Staff involved in all of the related organisational, administrative and assessment
tasks were fully briefed and effective in their specific roles. Evidence in assessment records
indicated validity and reliability and professional and rigorous practice by assessors involved.
The panel commends the School for excelling in this area.
The School works closely with the University’s Pedagogic Research Institute and Observatory
(PedRIO) to ensure that an appropriate and wide range of assessment types are utilised
across the modules of the programme. The School also seeks feedback from the external
examiners on the assessments used and their appropriateness and any changes that are
suggested are discussed at the Dental Programme Management Committee (DPMC) prior to
implementation.
Requirement 19: Students will have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and will undertake each activity relating to patient care on
sufficient occasions to enable them to develop the skills and the level of competency to
achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes (Requirement Met)
The panel was provided with evidence of the clinical activity that final year BDS students had
undertaken during the programme and they agreed that the students received an adequate
exposure to a range of patients and procedures.
The panel noted that during previous GDC inspections the School had struggled to ensure that
students had sufficient exposure to paediatric patients and they were pleased to note that the
School is addressing this with the assistance of a specific paediatric Consultant who is now
engaged to assist in this area. However, the panel suggests that the School closely monitors
this area to ensure that students achieve an appropriate level of experience treating paediatric
patients in the future.
The panel felt that the experience the students get working in the deprived areas of Plymouth
with marginalised communities is of great benefit. The panel agreed that this approach
ensured that students graduated with a good knowledge of treating patients from a very wide
range of backgrounds. Students have access to patients from a variety of different social,
cultural, ethnic and gender profiles and are engaged in outreach education and treatment. The
panel was pleased to hear extremely positive feedback on this area of the programme from
both staff and students, during meetings held as part of the inspection. The students were
particularly positive during discussions about this aspect of the programme, which they believe
develops their interpersonal skills and insight in to social issues impacting on dentistry.
Requirement 20: The provider should seek to improve student performance by
encouraging reflection and by providing feedback (Requirement Met)
The panel was satisfied with the School’s approach to improving student performance by
encouraging reflection and providing feedback and was provided with evidence of a range of
methods used by the School to manage feedback. After each clinical procedure students and
staff are required to reflect on the performance and this is logged in the ADB.
Each term academic staff and the Year Leads meet with student representatives to discuss
issues that have been raised and feedback is shared on the ‘Your Voice’ section of the EMILY

website. Students who met with the panel praised their tutors and the Year Leads within the
school, in respect of their interest and actions following the receipt of student feedback.
Students also receive personal feedback in a timely manner on completion of the marking of all
assessments, which can then be discussed further with academic tutors or module leads, if
desired.
Requirement 21: Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills, experience and
training to undertake the task of assessment, appropriate general or specialist
registration with a regulatory body (Requirement Met)
Prior to all assessments taking place, assessors and examiners are required to attend
assessor training and validation sessions and the panel was provided with reports of these
training events. The panel felt that providing assessors with case presentation videos to
assess, in preparation for live assessment was another area of good practice. The panel
recognised this as a developmental tool in refining and developing assessor skills, and in due
course impacting on validity and reliability in the assessment undertaken within the school.
The panel was provided and satisfied with the CVs of PDS assessors and felt they had
appropriate skills and experience to undertake the task of assessment. The panel was
informed that all external examiners are approved by either Plymouth University or the JARB.
Requirement 22: Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent to
which assessment processes are rigorous, set at the correct standard, ensure equity of
treatment for students and have been fairly conducted (Requirement Met)
During the programme inspection the panel met with the external examiners and external
advisor. The panel was informed that the external examiners are required to approve all
academic assessments and they are sent samples of all assessments for quality assurance
purposes. The external examiners also check a proportion of the marked scripts and are in
attendance during the clinical assessments.
The panel was also provided with external examiners reports and was pleased to see that the
School proactively seeks feedback from the external examiners and acts on this where
appropriate. The panel would encourage the external examiners/ advisor to provide specific
and measurable feedback in their reports regarding assessment processes, so as to ensure a
full reflection of the rigour applied. This would serve to ensure continued focus on
developmental opportunities for the School in assessment processes. Simultaneously it will
provide ongoing insight in to the equity and fairness applied within the various methods of
assessment for student candidates.
Requirement 23: Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear criteria.
Standard setting must be employed for summative assessments (Requirement Met)
The panel was impressed with the approach the School takes to standard setting assessments
for the programme. During the inspection the panel had an opportunity to meet the Faculty’s
psychometricians, who analyse the assessment data in order to set the pass marks. The
School uses the Angoff and Hofstee methods for standard setting the written examination
papers.
The panel had sight of the assessment criteria used at the School during the inspection, which
is used during training and calibration sessions in advance of clinical assessments. Criteria for
all assessments are also set out in the / Assessment Technical Manual/ Technical Operations
Manual, which is available to students on the EMILY website. The panel viewed a sample of
final assessment sheets/records which reflected an evidenced approach by assessors in terms

of data collected, and the recording of content which was reliable, valid, specific and
measureable against clear criteria. Observation of records and live assessment took place
where standards were not reached by a small number of student candidates. The panel were
satisfied with the approach taken in terms of the evidence gathered, the assessor skills and
overall fairness applied to the process and the final decisions.
Requirement 24: Where appropriate, patient/peer/customer feedback should
contribute to the assessment process (Requirement Partly Met)
The panel acknowledges that the School takes a proactive approach to getting general patient
feedback, with patient satisfaction surveys regularly taking place and a comments box in every
DEF reception, however the panel felt there was limited scope in its current format for patient
feedback to be used in the assessment process. The panel also noted that there was no
method for peers to feedback and contribute to the assessment process.
The panel agreed that the School must focus on this area to ensure that patient and peer
feedback is able, where appropriate, to contribute to the assessment process. The panel
believe this would also assist the School in addressing their internal quality assurance
processes, review of learning outcomes, teaching methods, assessment methods, and steps
which the school are taking in relation to the Francis report.
Requirement 25: Where possible, multiple samples of performance must be taken to
ensure the validity and reliability of the assessment conclusion (Requirement Met)
During the inspection the panel was provided with the module records for each year of the
BDS programme. The panel was also given evidence of the module mapping to the learning
outcomes and assessment schedules. The panel was satisfied that this evidence, in
collaboration with feedback from staff during meetings, enabled the School to meet this
requirement. The panel was informed, and given evidence, that students are given a minimum
target number of clinical procedures they must complete prior to sign-up for the final
examinations.
Students must also pass Proficiency Tests, which can be taken as many times as required until
the student and two clinical supervisors sign off the proficiency assessment, which must be
completed before graduation.
Requirement 26: The standard expected of students in each area to be assessed must
be clear and students and staff involved in assessment must be aware of this standard
(Requirement Met)
Both the students and staff handbooks contain details of the standard expected of students.
Students have access to their handbook on the EMILY website. During the programme
inspection the panel observed live assessment and examined associated marking sheets and
records, which indicated staff awareness as to the standard expected. The panel also held
meetings with students from each cohort and all of the groups agreed that they were provided
with a sufficient amount of information. In addition to this, external examiners reports are also
available to the students, should they wish to view them. There was also a view from students
that they could gain advice and guidance if required with regard to assessment queries, from
course tutors without any difficulty.
Actions
Req.
Number

Actions for the provider

Due date
(if applicable)

24

The School must actively seek written and verbal
feedback from patients across a range of ages and
profiles, including comments on paediatric care.
Organised feedback sessions during the academic year
would also be of benefit.

Update in 2015
Annual
Monitoring
Exercise

Standard 4 – Equality and diversity
The provider must comply with equal opportunities and discrimination legislation and
practice. They must also advocate this practice to students
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
27. Providers must adhere to current legislation and best

practice guidance relating to equality and diversity
28. Staff will receive training on equality and diversity,
development and appraisal mechanisms will include this
29. Providers will convey to students the importance of
compliance with equality and diversity law and principles of
the four UK nations both during training and after they begin
practice





GDC comments
Requirement 27: Providers must adhere to current legislation and best practice
guidance relating to equality and diversity (Requirement Met)
On the whole the panel was satisfied that the School meets this requirement, however during
meetings with the students it was identified that some students had not seen the University
bullying and harassment policy or maternity policy. The panel acknowledges that this
information is readily available on the University website but students were not always sure
where to find it.
The panel was pleased to see that the School has appointed a Disability Co-ordinator, who
attends the University liaison meetings and works closely with Disability Assist and the
Learning Gateway at the university to better support students. The School had also formed
contact with the local Community Police Constable who addresses community safety issues,
with a view to increasing the confidence and safety of students who are unfamiliar with the
area.
Discussion with staff generally highlighted a positive awareness of Diversity best practice
guidance. The panel believe that some further staff training in the identification and
integration of diversity best practice within the School would be beneficial. The panel is of the
view this would further develop staff who act as role models in promoting diversity to their
students.
The panel supports PU PSMD in its recent submission for the Athena Swan Bronze Award
and looks forward to seeing the results of this application.
Requirement 28: Staff will receive training on equality and diversity, development and
appraisal mechanisms will include this (Requirement Met)
The panel were provided with evidence of Plymouth University’s equality and diversity and
widening participation policies and procedures. The panel also had sight of the School’s
equality and diversity training programme. The panel was pleased that this is in place, but
emphasises the importance of continuous equality and diversity training and encourages the
School to ensure the staff appraisal system focuses on this area and in particular the
recognition and application by all staff, of best practice guidance which can then be role
modelled to students.
Requirement 29: Providers will convey to students the importance of compliance with

equality and diversity law and principles of the four UK nations both during training and
after they begin practice (Requirement Met)
Students attend lectures on conveying the importance of equality and diversity law and
principles during the programme. Students are also required to sign an agreement as part of
the admission process, which includes an undertaking to abide by the principles of equality
and diversity.
During the first and second years of the programme students work closely with disadvantaged
and marginalised groups in the community alongside the Community Engagement Team. This
practice encourages students to follow best practice and engage with aspects which impact on
culture, age, gender, sexual orientation, disability, faith and social issues. The panel agreed
that this was another area of good practice and was impressed with the positive feedback
received from students on this aspect of the programme. One student presented a case study
on her clinical experience with a patient who had experienced homelessness. This allowed the
panel to observe the impact and learning outcomes which result from the very positive learning
opportunity created within the School. The School should be commended for their wide ranging
community outreach in respect of their student experience which develops their students
understanding of Diversity and compliance with the associated legislation and principles.
Actions
Req.
Number

Actions for the provider

None

Due date
(if applicable)

Summary of Actions
Req. Actions for the provider

Observations

Due date
(if applicable)

Response from the Provider
Provider to record observations in response to
actions here

24

The School must actively seek written and verbal
feedback from patients across a range of ages
and profiles, including comments on paediatric
care. Organised feedback sessions during the
academic year would also be of benefit.

We are actively planning further developments in
response to the panel’s helpful comments in
relation to Requirement 24 and will provide an
update as requested in the 2015 Annual
Monitoring Exercise.

Update in 2015
Annual Monitoring
Exercise

Observations from the provider on content of report
Provider to record additional observations here

Recommendation to the GDC
The inspectors recommend that this qualification is sufficient for holders to apply for registration as a dentist with the General Dental Council

