Education provider:

Sheffield University

Programme/Award:

Diploma in Dental Hygiene and Diploma in
Dental Therapy

Remit and purpose:

Full inspection referencing the Standards for
Education to determine approval of the award for
the purpose of registration with the GDC as a
Dental Hygienist and Dental Therapist

Learning Outcomes:

Preparing for Practice (Dental Hygiene and
Dental Therapy)

Programme inspection dates:

14-15 February 2017

Examination inspection
dates:

1, 14-15 June 2017

Inspection panel:

Carolann Beck (Registrant dentist member)
Hayley Lawrence (Registrant dcp member)
Julie Stone (Lay member & Chair)

GDC Staff:

Laura English

Previous inspection:

2008

Outcome:

Recommended that the Diploma continues to be
approved for the graduating cohort to register as
Dental Hygienist and Dental Therapist

1

Full details of the inspection process can be found in annex 1
Inspection summary
The Sheffield University Diploma in Dental Hygiene and Dental Therapy (DH&DT) is
delivered to a high standard by a committed team of staff who benefit from the support of,
and close working relations with staff involved in the delivery of the University BDS
programme. The School ensures that there is a coherent approach to the teaching and
assessment of undergraduate dental and dental hygiene and dental therapy students and
this results in excellent opportunities for team working and integrated learning and
mentoring.
The School of Clinical Dentistry has strong internal governance and quality assurance
systems in place. These underpin the proactive approach taken by staff to the continuous
improvement and development of the Diploma and result in a well-structured course which
maps comprehensively to the GDC ‘Preparing for Practice’ learning outcomes.
Students benefit from being able to train in multiple hospital clinics and a variety of Outreach
primary care settings. They are exposed to a wide range of patient types and procedures,
which prepares them exceptionally well for practice as a newly qualified registrant. Teaching
and assessment across the various locations is consistent and at all stages of their training,
students benefit from regular feedback and support from teaching and clinical staff, tutors
and fellow dental and dental hygiene and dental therapy students. Students are assessed
via a range of assessments and the customised central recording system allows for easy
monitoring of clinical progress.
The diverse make-up of the cohorts studying for the Diploma enriches the experience of the
students and demonstrates a commitment to widening access to the programme and the
profession. Changes in the funding arrangements for the course are imminent in line with the
NHS Bursary Reform and it is hoped that funding will be available to support students and
ensure this excellent programme of study is able to continue.

2

3

Background and overview of Qualification
Annual intake
Programme duration
Format of programme

24
27 months
The First Examination
DEN105 Basic Oral Health Sciences and Clinical Practice
Before sitting any part of the First Examination a student must
have attended the relevant themes of that part. The First
Examination themes are:
The Human Body in Health and Disease
Law, Ethics and Professionalism
Pre-Clinical Skills I
Health Promotion and Education I
Oral Disease I
Pre-Clinical Skills II
Pre-Clinical Skills III
There are four parts to the First Examination and a student must
pass all parts. A student who fails to pass any part of the First
Examination will be required to resit the relevant parts. In the
absence of special circumstances if a candidate were to fail a
second time the examination board would recommend that
he/she withdraw from the course. A further chance to resit the
examination for a third attempt would need to be approved by the
Dental School Progress Committee.
Before completion of the programme a student must attend a
course and pass a class examination in Dental Radiology. A
student who fails will be required to repeat the examination after
a revision course. In the absence of special circumstances if a
student were to fail a second time the examination board would
recommend that the student withdraw from the course. A further
chance to resit the examination for a third attempt would need to
be approved by the Dental School Progress Committee.
The Final Examination
DEN106 Advanced Oral Health Sciences and Clinical Practice
Before sitting any part of the Final Examination a student must
have attended the relevant themes of that part. The Final
Examination themes are:
Study Skills and Personal Development
Clinical Practice
Health Promotion and Education II
Dental Radiology
Health Promotion and Education III
Outreach
Oral Disease II
4

Principles of Practice
Before sitting the final parts of the Final Examination a student
must have satisfied all the Finals sign up requirements. A student
who fails to meet all Finals sign up requirements will not be
permitted to sit the Final Examination and will be deemed to
have failed that examination.
There are three parts to the Final Examination and a student
must pass all parts. A student who fails to pass any part of the
Final Examination will be required to resit the relevant parts. In
the absence of special circumstances if a student were to fail a
second time the examination board would recommend that the
student withdraw from the course.
A student who has failed or was not assessed in the Final
Examination at the first attempt will be required before entering
the re-examination to undertake a further period of study
approved by the Dental School Progress Committee.
Successful completion of the First Examination and Final
Examination will satisfy the requirements for the Diploma in
Dental Hygiene and Dental Therapy and will entitle the holder to
apply for registration as a Dental Hygienist and Dental Therapist
with the General Dental Council.
On the recommendation of the Examiners the Diploma in Dental
Hygiene and Dental Therapy may be awarded with Distinction. In
considering recommendations for the award of Distinction
Examiners will take into account students’ performance in the
Final Examination.
Number of providers
delivering the
programme

One

The panel would like to thank the staff, students, and external stakeholders involved with the
Diploma in Dental Hygiene and Dental Therapy programme and examination for their cooperation and assistance with the inspection.

5

Standard 1 – Protecting patients
Providers must be aware of their duty to protect the public. Providers must ensure that
patient safety is paramount and care of patients is of an appropriate standard. Any risk
to the safety of patients and their care by students must be minimised.
Requirements
Met
Partly Not
met
met
1. Students must provide patient care only when they have
demonstrated adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical

procedures, the student should be assessed as competent in
the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients.
2. Providers must have systems in place to inform patients that
they may be treated by students and the possible implications
of this. Patient agreement to treatment by a student must be
obtained and recorded prior to treatment commencing.



3. Students must only provide patient care in an environment
which is safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with
relevant legislation and requirements regarding patient care,
including equality and diversity, wherever treatment takes
place.



4. When providing patient care and services, providers must
ensure that students are supervised appropriately according to
the activity and the student’s stage of development.



5. Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained.
This should include training in equality and diversity
legislation relevant for the role. Clinical supervisors must
have appropriate general or specialist registration with a
UK regulatory body.



6. Providers must ensure that students and all those involved in
the delivery of education and training are aware of their
obligation to raise concerns if they identify any risks to patient
safety and the need for candour when things go wrong.
Providers should publish policies so that it is clear to all
parities how concerns will be raised and how these concerns
will be acted upon. Providers must support those who do raise
concerns and provide assurance that staff and students will
not be penalised for doing so.



7. Systems must be in place to identify and record issues that may
affect patient safety. Should a patient safety issue arise,
appropriate action must be taken by the provider and where
necessary the relevant regulatory body should be notified.



8. Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and
apply as required. The content and significance of the student
fitness to practise procedures must be conveyed to students
and aligned to GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance.



6

Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be
familiar with the GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance.
Providers must also ensure that the GDC’s Standards for the
Dental Team are embedded within student training.
GDC comments
Requirement 1: Students must provide patient care only when they have demonstrated
adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical procedures, the student should be
assessed as competent in the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients. (Requirement Met)
The curriculum structure strongly supports the gradual development and assessment of skills
and knowledge. Students initially train in a pre-clinical skills laboratory and are only able to
commence treating patients once they have been assessed as competent to do so. There are
three pre-clinical ‘Clinical Skills’ modules in the first year and these introduce students to a
range of clinical techniques and provide them with the knowledge and skills to practise safely.
The initial ‘Clinical Skills’ module prepares students to undertake non-surgical periodontal
treatments, the second module prepares them for restorative treatments on adults and upon
completion of the final pre-clinical module, students will commence clinical operative
treatments on children. Throughout their pre-clinical training, students cover areas relating to
clinical practice such as health and safety, cross-infection control, professionalism, client
confidentiality and history taking.
The inspectors were impressed by the content of the pre-clinical modules and the range of
assessments used to test competence (OSCEs, continuous pre-clinical assessments, practical
and written examinations). The robust ‘gateway’ assessments at the end of each module must
be passed before the student can undertake the treatment type on clinic. It was noted that the
summative pre-clinical assessments, including re-sits, are held in the presence of an External
Examiner.
The inspectors commend the comprehensive introduction of feedback and reflection preclinically. Students from both cohorts showed very good understanding of the value of giving
and receiving feedback and self-reflection. They reported that they received excellent feedback
from their tutors throughout the course. The inspectors concluded that there is excellent tutor
support throughout the course, particularly if targeted, remedial training is required for
struggling students.
The inspectors noted the excellent ‘Near Peer’ initiative, in which 3rd year students supported
and encouraged 1st year students during their pre-clinical training, and the subsequent
‘buddying up’ between 2nd year and 1st year students. This clearly helped the 1st year students
transition to clinical practice and the inspectors commend the School on this good practice.
DH&DT students undertake their basic clinical skills training alongside BDS students and the
staff: student ratio during the basic skills training in the laboratory was a little on the high side,
averaging 1: 11. Whilst the inspectors and the students with whom they spoke, recognise the
benefit of shared learning, the School may wish to reflect on the availability of tutors to
students at this important stage in the development of their skills.
Requirement 2: Providers must have systems in place to inform patients that they may
be treated by students and the possible implications of this. Patient agreement to
treatment by a student must be obtained and recorded prior to treatment commencing.
(Requirement Met)

7

Patients are initially assessed by a clinician in hospital clinics and Outreach placements for
their suitability to be treated by students according to their stage of learning. It is at this stage
that informed, written consent for treatment by a student is obtained.
The inspectors were impressed by the high level of professionalism and good communication
skills demonstrated by the students they met with. It was clear they understood the importance
of gaining valid consent and the inspectors were assured that students routinely introduced
themselves to patients and sought and recorded verbal consent appropriately for each session
of treatment. Students are exposed to a diverse patient mix during the course and particularly
whilst on their community placement, which provides them with excellent experience of
communicating with patients who may not be able to consent to treatment themselves. The
inspectors noted that students also gave consent to treating one another.
Students wore uniforms and badges which clearly identified them, and the inspectors were
satisfied that there is sufficient information available in the clinical locations used by the
programmes to make it clear to patients that student treatment may be offered to them.

Requirement 3: Students must only provide patient care in an environment which is
safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with relevant legislation and
requirements regarding patient care, including equality and diversity, wherever
treatment takes place. (Requirement Met)
The inspectors were assured that each of the locations used for students to treat patients were
safe, appropriate and thoroughly monitored. Most clinical practice takes place in the Charles
Clifford Dental Hospital (CCDH) which is subject to the Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust protocols regarding clinical governance, quality and safety. There are
effective governance mechanisms in place and excellent oversight of health and safety matters
pertaining to the clinical environment, notably through the Health and Safety Governance
Committee. Any learning points arising from issues raised are routinely shared with students
and staff. Students also undertake some paediatric treatments at the Sheffield Children’s
Hospital (SCH) and this is subject to similar Trust policies as the Charles Clifford Dental
Hospital.
Outreach placements are governed by their local Trust protocols or, in the case of the General
Dental Practices, by their own policies and procedures. The School undertakes an annual
check on the suitability of the placement as a location for training students, which includes an
assessment of student, patient and staff feedback. Staff from the placements attend visits of
other providers with a member of staff from the School and this provides a very useful
opportunity for the cross-fertilisation of ideas and approaches. It was noted as good practice
that the placements receive feedback from the School after their visits. The inspectors
observed that the findings of the annual visits are reviewed by the Teaching Committee and
they were confident that any actions identified would be acted upon promptly and in full.
Each of the clinical locations used on the course are subject to CQC inspections, which
provides a further level of assurance as to their appropriateness for clinical practice and as a
suitable learning environment.
The inspectors were confident that Equality and Diversity legislation is complied with across
each of the clinical locations. The School actively promotes Equality and Diversity principles in
its training for students and all staff involved on the course. In addition to online training, talks
from external speakers are organised and students have excellent exposure, across the range
of Outreach placements, to a wide breadth of patient types. They gain experience of working
with an interpreter and of treating patients from varying social and economic backgrounds.
The inspectors commend the well-established and very well-integrated model of training on
8

this course, which incorporates a range of clinics and placements that are ideal for students to
train in.

Requirement 4: When providing patient care and services, providers must ensure that
students are supervised appropriately according to the activity and the student’s stage
of development. (Requirement Met)
Levels of supervision vary according to the clinical location and the stage of the students’
learning. When students undertake patient treatments in the CCDH restorative clinic the staff:
student ratio is 1:8, the ratio on the paediatric clinic is 1:6 and when rotating through other
hospital clinics, the students benefit from a supervision ratio of 1: 2 or 1: 3. Students work in
pairs, with one nursing for the other. In their first year, the School seeks to pair students who
have a dental nurse background with those who have come straight from A levels on clinic to
enable both to benefit from each other’s different skill sets and experience. In Outreach,
students work alongside a qualified dental nurse and the ratio of supervising dental staff to
student is either 1:3 or 1:4.
The inspectors were pleased to note the positive approach to team-working - dentists, dental
therapists and dental nurses are involved in the oversight of, and provision of feedback to
students. 3rd year DH&DT students and BDS students are sometimes based on the restorative
clinic at the same time as 1st and 2nd year DH&DT students and on these occasions, they are
encouraged to provide feedback on their observations of patient treatment and interaction.
As mentioned in Requirement 1, a further layer of support is provided via the ‘Near Peer’
initiative, which involves 3rd year DH&DT students supporting 1st year students pre-clinically,
and via the ‘buddy’ system which facilitates support from ‘buddies’ in other year groups.
Additionally, each student is allocated to a School ‘Dental Family’ which consists of BDS and
DH&DT students from different years. This excellent support network facilitates the exchange
of ideas and provides an opportunity for students to ask questions and seek guidance from one
another and is commended as good practice.

Requirement 5: Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained. This should
include training in equality and diversity legislation relevant for the role. Clinical
supervisors must have appropriate general or specialist registration with a UK
regulatory body. (Requirement Met)
Clinical academic staff are all GDC registrants and their status is checked annually by the
School through the Staff Review and Development Scheme or via the NHS annual appraisal
process.
The inspectors were satisfied that there was a thorough programme of induction and training
for new staff. Regular staff training events and the internal staff development program enable
staff to be updated on new developments and facilitate continual professional development.
The inspectors noted that Outreach clinical staff attend an annual training day, and helpfully
this is provided on two consecutive days to enable all individuals to take part without adversely
impacting on service provision. It was clear that there was enthusiasm for training and a very
collaborative approach, with sessions sometimes organised by, and held at Outreach clinics,
with University based staff being invited to attend.
The mandatory training days comprise a mixture of compulsory items and areas which have
been requested and the inspectors were impressed by the wide range of topics covered. There
was evidence of excellent initiatives to support equality and diversity training.
9

Requirement 6: Providers must ensure that students and all those involved in the
delivery of education and training are aware of their obligation to raise concerns if they
identify any risks to patient safety and the need for candour when things go wrong.
Providers should publish policies so that it is clear to all parties how concerns should
be raised and how these concerns will be acted upon. Providers must support those
who do raise concerns and provide assurance that staff and students will not be
penalised for doing so. (Requirement Met)
Clear and appropriate policies and procedures for raising concerns at CCDH and a sample of
Outreach placements were made available to the inspectors. It was clear that both staff and
students with whom the inspectors met were familiar with the documents. Crucially, the
students knew when and how to raise concerns and their understanding of ‘duty of candour’
was impressive. It was clear that students would feel fully supported in the event of them
needing to raise a concern.
Staff are kept informed of policies and procedures via mandatory training, unit meetings and
Clinical Service Committees. Students are introduced to raising concerns, whistle-blowing and
safeguarding issues in their first year of study as part of a dedicated module and this is
revisited throughout the course with several possible assessment points. Students are also
provided with a lecture in their first year on the NHS Constitution which reinforces the values
and behaviours expected within the organisation and highlights the importance of ensuring
patient safety.

Requirement 7: Systems must be in place to identify and record issues that may affect
patient safety. Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be taken by
the provider and where necessary the relevant regulatory body should be notified.
(Requirement Met)
CCDH complies with the Trust Incident Management policy and utilises the online DATIX
system to record patient safety incidents. Staff and students that the inspectors spoke with
were all familiar with this. The inspectors commend the School for encouraging staff and
student to record incidents however minor as this engenders a culture of openness. Staff and
dental nurses on clinic support students to record any incident reports and students all felt
comfortable to discuss any issues arising with tutors.
The inspectors were assured from the evidence provided during the inspection that patient
safety incidents are dealt with in a robust and transparent manner, utilising the relevant School
and Trust governance mechanisms. All incidents are documented in a regular Governance
report and discussed at School executive meetings and hospital management team meetings.
Information relating to any incident and follow up action is discussed at staff meetings and the
inspectors concluded there were systems in place to enable lessons to be learnt both at course
and School level.

Requirement 8: Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and apply as
required. The content and significance of the student fitness to practise procedures
must be conveyed to students and aligned to GDC Student Fitness to Practise
Guidance. Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar with the
GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance. Providers must also ensure that the GDC’s
Standard for the Dental Team are embedded within student training. (Requirement Met)

10

There is a School specific supplement to the University Fitness to Practise regulations, which
is appropriate for students studying for professional healthcare qualifications. The students
with whom the inspectors met had a good understanding of situations when these regulations
may be invoked by the School.
Students are introduced to the School’s expectations regarding behaviour and professionalism
on their first day and the theme of professionalism is covered in a specific module on Law,
Ethics and Professionalism in the first year. At the beginning of each year of study students are
required to sign a declaration, which requires them to inform the School of any development
which may affect their fitness to practise as a student. The curriculum covers the GDC
Standards for the Dental Team and the students showed good awareness of their relevance to
professional practice.
All staff in the CCDH and Outreach placements are made aware of the Student Fitness to
Practise policies and procedures and the inspectors were informed that a recent training
session had covered student professionalism, attendance and behaviour.
The Dental School has not needed to use the School Fitness to Practise procedures for
DH&DT students for many years, but the inspectors were confident that they would be followed
correctly if the need arose.

Actions
No

Actions for the Provider

Due date

11

Standard 2 – Quality evaluation and review of the programme
The provider must have in place effective policy and procedures for the monitoring and
review of the programme.
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
9. The provider must have a framework in place that details how

it manages the quality of the programme which includes
making appropriate changes to ensure the curriculum
continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and
adapts to changing legislation and external guidance. There
must be a clear statement about where responsibility lies for
this function.

10. Any concerns identified through the Quality Management
framework, including internal and external reports relating to
quality, must be addressed as soon as possible and the GDC
notified of serious threats to students achieving the learning
outcomes.
11. Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external
quality assurance procedures. External quality assurance
should include the use of external examiners, who should be
familiar with the GDC learning outcomes and their context
and QAA guidelines should be followed where applicable.
Patient and/or customer feedback must be collected and
used to inform programme development.
12. The provider must have effective systems in place to quality
assure placements where students deliver treatment to
ensure that patient care and student assessment across all
locations meets these Standards. The quality assurance
systems should include the regular collection of student and
patient feedback relating to placements.





GDC comments
Requirement 9: The provider must have a framework in place that details how it
manages the quality of the programme which includes making appropriate changes to
ensure the curriculum continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and adapts
to changing legislation and external guidance. There must be a clear statement about
where responsibility lies for this function. (Requirement Met)
The School Quality Management Framework defines the mechanisms that are used to review
and develop the Diploma in Dental Hygiene and Dental Therapy. These enable University/
Trust, Faculty and School / course - level oversight.
It was evident from meeting minutes that the School-wide Theme Leader’s Groups, Teaching
Committee meetings, Dental Service Manager Outreach meetings and Academic Unit Review
Groups function effectively and provide regular and meaningful review of the Diploma. The
School focuses on development across, as well as within courses, and the strengths of this
cohesive approach were evident from the integration in teaching and clinical practice of the
DH&DT and BDS students. Year/ Programme Working Party, Course Review Group and Staff
Student Committee meeting minutes demonstrated a constructive and progressive approach to
the quality assurance of locally managed operational issues and curriculum development. The
12

well-established and integrated working with Outreach staff supports the effective quality
assurance of students’ clinical training in primary practice.
In respect of Faculty and University – level oversight, the inspectors had sight of the Faculty
managed Annual Reflection reports which highlight good practice and areas of concern and
they noted that the implementation of enhanced feedback was driven by the University’s
Learning and Teaching Strategy. A Periodic Review of the School is due next year but the
scope and precise timing of when this will take place is yet to be agreed.
The School’s Quality Management Framework is overseen by the School Management Team
and the School Executive with ultimate responsibility for the quality assurance of School
qualifications sitting with the Dean of the School.
The inspectors noted that the current curriculum was introduced in 2014 to reflect the learning
outcomes within the GDC document ‘Preparing for Practice’ and that no changes are
envisaged, at least until the long-term funding arrangements for the course have been clarified.
The inspectors formed the view that there are effective processes in place to review the
qualification at various levels with well-defined reporting lines and areas of responsibility that
facilitate qualification development and progress.

Requirement 10: Any concerns identified through the Quality Management framework,
including internal and external reports relating to quality, must be addressed as soon
as possible and the GDC notified of serious threats to students achieving the learning
outcomes. (Requirement Met)
There is a close working relationship between the School and the Dental Hospital via the
Teaching Committee, the School Management Team and the CCDS Executive Team and the
inspectors were assured that any concerns would be managed efficiently and appropriately.
The inspectors had sight of evidence, such as the School and Hospital risk registers and
School Management Committee meeting minutes to suggest there are systems in place for
recording and escalating potential threats to the relevant individual or forum. The School also
provided as evidence examples of issues arising at course level which had been thoroughly
followed up on.

Requirement 11: Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external quality
assurance procedures. External quality assurance should include the use of external
examiners, who should be familiar with the GDC learning outcomes and their context
and QAA guidelines should be followed where applicable. Patient and/or customer
feedback must be collected and used to inform programme development. (Requirement
Partly Met)
The School has a strong and effective framework for assuring the quality of this qualification.
In addition to the meetings which are referenced in Requirement 9, the inspectors commend
the School on initiatives that enable the students’ perspective to be factored in to course
review. Students formally evaluate a range of aspects of the course up to twice a year and the
results are considered initially at Year or Programme Working Party meetings. Student
representatives attend and participate in these meetings and they are also invited to the
Teaching Committee meetings. The ‘You Say, We Did’ scheme provided a further avenue for
students’ voices to be heard and acted upon.

13

The friendly and ‘open door’ approach within the School also creates opportunities for
comments to be raised informally. The inspectors noted the co-operative and solutionfocussed approach taken by the staff and students to discussing and acting upon courserelated feedback. An example of where student feedback influenced the course was provided
- DH&DT students alerted the School to the fact that the patient mix at one Outreach practice
wasn’t particularly suitable for them and as a result, the practice is now used solely for BDS
students.
A Patient Feedback Questionnaire is used to enable patient involvement in course
development. The questionnaire asks patients to comment on students’ communication skills
during treatment sessions and the information obtained from this exercise will help the School
to identify whether their approach to teaching and assessing students (on communication
skills) requires any change.
External input on the course is obtained principally from three external examiners who are
required to quality assure key summative assessments, as per the procedure in the
Undergraduate Examination Manual. The external examiners commented very favourably on
the provision of materials, training and updates by the staff. They confirmed that the School is
receptive and responsive to comments raised, an example of this is the introduction of an
unseen paediatric case in to the final case presentations which resulted from a suggestion
made in an external examiner report.
Feedback from external examiners is reviewed initially by the Programme Director and then
discussed at Theme Leader meetings. Points arising and agreed actions are ratified at the
Teaching Committee meetings. A review of recent external examiner reports and meeting
minutes by the inspectors assured them that this process is functioning well.
It was apparent to the inspectors that the effective school quality management framework
underpins a culture of continuous improvement and inclusive working. The well-structured,
delivered and monitored Diploma in Dental Hygiene and Dental Therapy is a testament to this,
for which the School is to be highly commended.
Requirement 12: The provider must have effective systems in place to quality assure
placements where students deliver treatment to ensure that patient care and student
assessment across all locations meets these Standards. The quality assurance systems
should include the regular collection of student and patient feedback relating to
placements. (Requirement Met)
Students undertake clinical training in two locations outside of the CCDS; the Sheffield
Children’s Hospital and the Outreach placements in primary care.
There are designated Committees within the School’s quality management framework for
representatives from the Outreach placements to feed in to the Teaching Committee and
School Management Team. The Dental Services Managers Group, which is chaired by the
Outreach Theme Leader oversees largely administrative and operational issues and the
Outreach Working Party reviews the quality of the learning, assessment and experience across
Outreach settings.
Students can feed back on the placements they have attended, both informally and formally via
a feedback form and scheduled debrief session with the Outreach theme leader. Any issues
arising will be escalated to the Theme Leader and Teaching Committee meetings, as
appropriate. Patients receiving treatment from a student in an Outreach placement practice are
also asked for feedback on their experience and any course-relevant comments are dealt with
in a similar way to student feedback.
14

The School undertakes its own annual review of the Outreach placements, in accordance with
a documented protocol. The School is to be commended on its success in integrating Outreach
clinical training in to the programme. The primary care placements provide excellent clinical
training opportunities for students, they are very well monitored and of a high educational
value.
The clinics attended by students at the Sheffield Children’s Hospital are supervised by staff
from the Dental School and these sessions are subject to review by the DH&DT courses
review group.
Actions
No

Actions for the Provider

Due date

15

GDC comments
Standard 3– Student assessment
Assessment must be reliable and valid. The choice of assessment method must be
appropriate to demonstrate achievement of the GDC learning outcomes. Assessors
must be fit to perform the assessment task.
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
13. To award the qualification, providers must be assured that
students have demonstrated attainment across the full range

of learning outcomes, and that they are fit to practise at the
level of a safe beginner. Evidence must be provided that
demonstrates this assurance, which should be supported by
a coherent approach to the principles of assessment referred
to in these standards.
14. The provider must have in place management systems to
plan, monitor and centrally record the assessment of
students, including the monitoring of clinical and/or technical
experience, throughout the programme against each of the
learning outcomes.



15. Students must have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients and procedures and should undertake each activity
relating to patient care on sufficient occasions to enable them
to develop the skills and the level of competency to achieve
the relevant learning outcomes.



16. Providers must demonstrate that assessments are fit for
purpose and deliver results which are valid and reliable. The
methods of assessment used must be appropriate to the
learning outcomes, in line with current and best practice and
be routinely monitored, quality assured and developed.
17. Assessment must utilise feedback collected from a variety of
sources, which should include other members of the dental
team, peers, patients and/or customers.
18. The provider must support students to improve their
performance by providing regular feedback and by
encouraging students to reflect on their practice.
19. Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills,
experience and training to undertake the task of assessment,
including appropriate general or specialist registration with a
UK regulatory body. Examiners/assessors should have
received training in equality and diversity relevant for their
role.
20. Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent
to which assessment processes are rigorous, set at the
correct standard, ensure equity of treatment for students and
have been fairly conducted. The responsibilities of the
external examiners must be clearly documented.











16


21. Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear
criteria. The standard expected of students in each area
to be assessed must be clear and students and staff
involved in assessment must be aware of this standard.
An appropriate standard setting process must be
employed for summative assessments.
Requirement 13: To award the qualification, providers must be assured that students
have demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes, and that they
are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner. Evidence must be provided that
demonstrates this assurance, which should be supported by a coherent approach to the
principles of assessment referred to in these standards. (Requirement Met)
The Diploma in Dental Hygiene and Dental Therapy Assessment Strategy document details
the School’s commitment to ensuring the provision of high quality learning and development.
Current priorities include embedding the evidence-based professionalism assessment
framework into the course and adapting to NHS Bursary Reform to ensure ongoing training.
The Programme Regulations, Statement on Methods of Assessment and Undergraduate
Examination Manual support the Assessment Strategy. They provide a clear description of
assessment procedures, including blueprinting, standard setting, marking, setting and review
of examination questions and papers and the inspectors were satisfied that these thorough
guidance documents are applied effectively.
The curriculum and course assessments are mapped to the relevant learning outcomes in the
GDC document Preparing for Practice. There are multiple assessment points throughout the
programme and a suitable range of assessments with very good coverage of the learning
outcomes. The mapping documentation clearly indicated whether a learning outcome was ‘at
risk’ of a stipulated assessment or would ‘always’ be assessed. The information is managed
electronically and any amendments occur after consideration and approval at various levels,
with major changes requiring agreement by the Teaching Committee.
Mechanisms to define, measure and assess ‘professionalism’ will be incorporated into the
course from next year. It was clear a great deal of effort has been taken to ensure the
assessment of students’ professionalism on clinic is meaningful and the inspectors were most
impressed by this new element of the course. The introduction of a tailored mentoring
programme to support students develop their professionalism skills was also particularly
notable.
Student progression is monitored regularly at various intervals and there are three major preclinical skills gateway assessment which students are required to pass. Failure to pass the
formal DEN105 and DEN106 examinations will prevent progression on the course.
At set points throughout the year, the Dental Schools Progress Committee reviews the entirety
of the students’ performance. Students are required to reach certain clinical targets and
undertake certain clinical competency assessments prior to starting Outreach placements and
prior to sign-up for the end of year examinations. The Progress Committee also reviews the
students’ performance across a range of summative assessments, ensures they have
demonstrated satisfactory levels of professionalism and completed their Outreach placement
requirements.

17

The inspectors were satisfied that the procedures in place enable the School to graduate only
those students who they are assured have demonstrated fitness to practice as a safe beginner.
The mechanisms the School relies on to gain their assurance are robust, thorough and very
well managed.
Requirement 14: The provider must have in place management systems to plan, monitor
and centrally record the assessment of students, including the monitoring of clinical
and/or technical experience, throughout the programme against each of the learning
outcomes. (Requirement Met)
Planning, development and quality assurance of the programme takes place at various levels
within the School, as described under Requirement 9 and principally at Theme Leaders’
meetings.
A bespoke e-portfolio has been designed to record and facilitate the monitoring of student
clinical achievement. The inspectors were impressed by the versatility of the system and
noted that staff and students found it easy and reliable to use. Students use well-designed
clinical feedback books to capture their continuous clinical activity and assessment results and
they are required to transfer the data on to the e-portfolio. Regular audits by the programme
clinical co-ordinator ensure accurate data entry and provide an opportunity to review the
clinical progress across the cohort.
The e-portfolio is reviewed by students and staff during the personal tutor meetings. Students
commented on the fact their tutors readily identified if anyone needed extra support or practice
and if so, ensured this was provided. Staff meetings routinely review students’ progress in
respect of their clinical targets and competencies.
All assessment results across the cohort are recorded centrally on an EXCEL spreadsheet and
presented at Examination Board meetings throughout the programme. There are two different
examination spreadsheets which record the outcome of formative and summative
assessments and a separate programme database records professionalism and attendance.
Due to the excellent mapping of assessments to the learning outcomes and the robust
methods of recording and transferring data, the School can easily review the progress of
students’ clinical and non-clinical experience and skills.

Requirement 15: Students must have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and should undertake each activity relating to patient care on
sufficient occasions to enable them to develop the skills and the level of competency to
achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes. (Requirement Met)
It was clear to the inspectors from their review of the e-portfolio that students gained a high
level of exposure across the range of clinical procedures and patient types in the CCDH clinics,
the Children’s hospital and the Outreach placements. There was clear evidence to indicate
that graduating students gained sufficient experience and developed their skills over a number
of treatment sessions to reach the level of a safe beginner. The clinical targets require students
to undertake a minimum number of treatments that are graded at ‘learner’ and ‘competent’
level. Generally students far exceeded these target numbers.
The high levels of experience and skills development opportunities for students throughout the
programme is in part due to the effective e-portfolio, which gives a clear overview of students’
achievement at any point in time. There are also effective measures in place to monitor the
availability of patients in CCDH across the required clinical specialities - for example, a clear
Student Patient Situation Report is produced regularly – and this ensures patient flow is
optimised. The students rotate across hospital clinics throughout the programme and patient
18

referrals to and from BDS students is encouraged, which further assists students to gain
maximum practice. In addition, the use of the Outreach placements provides excellent
exposure to a range of clinical procedures. Students are allocated to at least one general
dental practice and one salaried clinic which gives them access to a broad demographic base
of patients. It also ensures that all students become familiar with the current ‘UDA system’,
clinical software and finances in addition to gaining considerable experience of primary care
clinical treatments.

Requirement 16: Providers must demonstrate that assessments are fit for purpose and
deliver results which are valid and reliable. The methods of assessment used must be
appropriate to the learning outcomes, in line with current and best practice and be
routinely monitored, quality assured and developed. (Requirement Met)
The comprehensive Statement on Methods of Assessment and Undergraduate Examination
Manuel underpins the School’s approach to assessment in the Diploma. The inspectors were
impressed by the quality and range of assessments and number of assessment points within
the programme. There was evidence of effective calibration across clinics and between the
CCDH and the Outreach placements, good question- and paper-setting processes and the
School is also to be commended for the clear blue-printing of every summative assessment
against the GDC learning outcomes.
The inspectors had sight of summative assessments comprising Multiple Choice Questions
and Structured Short Answer Questions, practical skills, competency assessments and clinical
case examinations. Where applicable, the assessments are criterion-referenced and significant
post-assessment analysis takes place in accordance with the School procedures. The size of
the cohort was appropriately factored into this analysis.
Careful item analysis is undertaken to enhance questions for future papers and there is active
dialogue with external examiners to develop the design and quality of assessments. An
example of this is that the School acted upon the recommendation of external examiners to
include an unseen paediatric case presentation in the final examination - this enables greater
standardisation of marking and provides a useful ‘Direct Access’ scenario. Assessment
feedback forms are completed by assessors after assessment sittings and comments are
incorporated into the development of questions for future sittings.
It was evident that there has been considerable development of the approach to assessing
professionalism within the School. The inspectors were impressed at the excellent marking
descriptors for assessing students’ professionalism and the process by which students selfassess and tutors independently grade, culminating in a discussion and arrival at an agreed
mark. The accompanying mentor support programme which has been designed to assist
students in this area is likely to add great value.

Requirement 17: Assessment must utilise feedback collected from a variety of sources,
which should include other members of the dental team, peers, patients and/or
customers. (Requirement Met)
Patients contribute to the assessment of students in their clinical competency assessments
and the School has also started using actors as simulated patients in the final OSCE. The
mark and comments provided by the patients contribute to the summative grade awarded to
the student for the OSCE station. Patient feedback obtained in the Outreach placements is
also reviewed and considered as part of the end of placement assessments, in addition to
feedback from receptionists and nurses. Dental nurses in the CCDH clinics routinely feedback
to both tutors and students and contribute to the holistic assessment of students’ behaviour
19

and performance. The School has conducted a patient feedback survey concerning students’
communication skills, and the results of this will be discussed at a course review. If the results
suggest improvements to the course need to be made, the inspectors are confident this will be
acted upon.
As noted above, the School uses an innovative and supportive programme entitled ‘Near Peer
teaching’ which enables 1st year students to be mentored by a 3rd year student on the course.
The senior students provide feedback and guidance to their junior colleagues and this feature
of the course was praised highly by students during the inspection. DH&DT students also
receive feedback from BDS students if they are on clinic together or sharing a patient.
Formative peer assessment and feedback of clinical and non-clinical performance also occurs
throughout the course. The inspectors noted that the students they met with recognised the
benefit of having been introduced to the concept of both giving and receiving of feedback in
their pre-clinical teaching and they felt very comfortable with this as a tool for continuous
improvement.

Requirement 18: The provider must support students to improve their performance by
providing regular feedback and by encouraging students to reflect on their practice.
(Requirement Met)
The inspectors were impressed by the School’s provision of feedback to students and at the
level and quality of the student reflection they saw. A well-designed clinical feedback book,
which allows students to reflect and self-grade on their clinical and professional performance,
is used for all clinical activity. The book is designed so that a tutor will then grade the student
across the same areas and provide prompt written feedback. Clear guidance on how to reflect
and feedback supports the activity undertaken.
Students commented favourably on the high level of verbal and written feedback they receive
from tutors in the CCDH clinics and in their Outreach placements. They receive verbal
feedback from nurses, peers and BDS students and it was clear they understood and valued
the importance of this to their continual development.
Group feedback is routinely provided after examinations and in the event of a student failing an
examination, they will receive detailed individual feedback to assist their remedial training.
The inspectors were struck by the ability of the students to critically self-reflect and the School
is to be commended on this. In addition to the continuous reflection on clinical activity, students
produce a specific guided reflective report on clinical practice and Outreach and this
contributes to the sign-up assessment for final examinations.
Requirement 19: Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills, experience and
training to undertake the task of assessment, including appropriate general or specialist
registration with a UK regulatory body. Examiners/ assessors should have received
training in equality and diversity relevant for their role. (Requirement Met)
The inspectors were satisfied that all examiners and assessors were adequately experienced
and trained to undertake the role of assessment. The GDC registration status of all individuals
involved in the provision of the course was confirmed.
The School arranges regular and comprehensive training on assessment and the introduction
of the evidence based approach to assessing professionalism has involved additional, specific
sessions. There is excellent inclusion of Outreach tutors in the training schedule which
includes meaningful training on Equality and Diversity.
20

Requirement 20: Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent to which
assessment processes are rigorous, set at the correct standard, ensure equity of
treatment for students and have been fairly conducted. The responsibilities of the
external examiners must be clearly documented. (Requirement Met)
The University External Examiner Code of Practice sets out the expectations and role of the
external examiner. It states clearly that their role includes ensuring that assessments are
credible, equitable, rigorous, consistent and fair. The external examiners fulfil this role by
moderating and approving draft examination papers or assessments, sampling marked papers
or projects and reviewing marking criteria, internal moderation processes and the spread of
marks. External examiners also attend end of year practical examinations in an observatory
capacity.
The inspectors had sight of external examiners inspection reports and met with the current
examiners. They were satisfied that the processes in place enable a full and transparent
external review of assessments and that the School actively consider and, where appropriate,
act upon recommendations in external examiner reports. This has been commented on in
Standard 2.

Requirement 21: Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear criteria. The
standard expected of students in each area to be assessed must be clear and students
and staff involved in assessment must be aware of this standard. An appropriate
standard setting process must be employed for summative assessments. (Requirement
Met)
There was evidence of appropriate and calibrated marking in most of the papers and mark
sheets seen by the inspectors. They noticed an absence of the use of the 0-30% grade, even if
a correct answer was not provided, in a final year SAQ paper, which seemed a little confusing.
There was also some variation in the marking of the final year project between academic and
clinical markers. However, the inspectors were satisfied that these were the exception and
that all other assessments viewed were marked consistently and against clear criteria.
Robust marking schemes for various assessment types are described in literature for both
students and staff and students with whom the inspectors met confirmed that they were clear
about the standards they were expected to achieve throughout the course.
The inspectors noted that some changes to the Pre-Clinical Skills II marking descriptors for
practical examinations were due to be reviewed by the Teaching Committee.
The inspectors concluded there was a good range of assessments throughout the course and
the paper setting, marking and evaluation processes in place were of a high standard. The
inspectors had sight of very comprehensive standard setting and post exam analysis of
question performance and their review of this area was facilitated by the thorough and clear
records maintained by the School.
Actions
No
21

Actions for the Provider
i. The School should consider reviewing the approach to the
use of the 0-30% grade in SAQ papers

Due date
Annual
Monitoring
2017/2018

ii. The School should review its approach to ensuring
consistency of marking of the final year project.
21

Summary of Actions
Req.
Action
number

Observations

Due date

Response from Provider
21

i. The School should consider reviewing the approach
to the use of the 0-30% grade in SAQ papers

Annual Monitoring
2017/2018

ii. The School should review its approach to ensuring
consistency of marking of the final year project.

Observations from the provider on content of report
The School would like to thank the inspectors for this very positive report and feedback.

Recommendations to the GDC
The inspectors recommend that the Sheffield University Diploma in Dental Hygiene and Dental Therapy continues to be approved for holders to
apply for registration as a dental therapist and dental hygienist with the General Dental Council.
The School must provide detailed information regarding how they have met, or are endeavouring to meet, the required actions set down in this
report as part of the GDC’s 2017/2018 annual monitoring exercise.

22

ANNEX ONE
Inspection purpose and process
1.

As part of its duty to protect patients and promote high standards within the professions it regulates, the General Dental Council (GDC)
quality assures the education and training of student dentists and dental care professionals (DCPs) at institutions whose qualifications
enable the holder to apply for registration with the GDC. It also quality assures new qualifications where it is intended that the qualification
will lead to registration. The aim of this quality assurance activity is to ensure that institutions produce a new registrant who has
demonstrated, on graduation, that they have met the learning outcomes required for registration with the GDC. This ensures that students
who obtain a qualification leading to registration are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner.

2.

Inspections are a key element of the GDC’s quality assurance activity. They enable a recommendation to be made to the Council of the
GDC regarding the ‘sufficiency’ of the programme for registration as a dentist and ‘approval’ of the programme for registration as a dental
care professional. The GDC’s powers are derived under Part II, Section 9 of the Dentists Act 1984 (as amended).

3.

The GDC document ‘Standards for Education’ 2nd edition 1 is the framework used to evaluate qualifications. There are 21 Requirements in
three distinct Standards, against which each qualification is assessed.

4.

The education provider is requested to undertake a self-evaluation of the programme against the individual Requirements under the
Standards for Education. This involves stating whether each Requirement is ‘met’, ‘partly met’ or ‘not met’ and to provide evidence in
support of their evaluation. The inspection panel examines this evidence, may request further documentary evidence and gathers further
evidence from discussions with staff and students. The panel will reach a decision on each Requirement, using the following descriptors:

A Requirement is met if:
“There is sufficient appropriate evidence derived from the inspection process. This evidence provides the inspectors with broad confidence
that the provider demonstrates the Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students is supportive of documentary
evidence and the evidence is robust, consistent and not contradictory. There may be minor deficiencies in the evidence supplied but these are
likely to be inconsequential.”
A Requirement is partly met if:

1

http://www.gdc-uk.org/Aboutus/education/Documents/Standards%20for%20Education.pdf

23

“Evidence derived from the inspection process is either incomplete or lacks detail and, as such, fails to convince the inspection panel that the
provider fully demonstrates the Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students may not fully support the
evidence submitted or there may be contradictory information in the evidence provided. There is, however, some evidence of compliance and
it is likely that either (a) the appropriate evidence can be supplied in a short time frame, or, (b) any deficiencies identified can be addressed
and evidenced in the annual monitoring process.”
A Requirement is not met if
“The provider cannot provide evidence to demonstrate a Requirement or the evidence provided is not convincing. The information gathered at
the inspection through meetings with staff and students does not support the evidence provided or the evidence is inconsistent and/or
incompatible with other findings. The deficiencies identified are such as to give rise to serious concern and will require an immediate action
plan from the provider. The consequences of not meeting a Requirement in terms of the overall sufficiency of a programme will depend upon
the compliance of the provider across the range of Requirements and the possible implications for public protection”
5.

Inspection reports highlight areas of strength and draw attention to areas requiring improvement and development, including actions that
are required to be undertaken by the provider. Where an action is needed for a Requirement to be met, the term ‘must’ is used to describe
the obligation on the provider to undertake this action. For these actions the inspectors may stipulate a specific timescale by which the
action must be completed or when an update on progress must be provided. In their observations on the content of the report, the provider
should confirm the anticipated date by which these actions will be completed. Where an action would improve how a Requirement is met,
the term ‘should’ is used and for these actions there will be no due date stipulated. Providers will be asked to report on the progress in
addressing the required actions through the annual monitoring process. Serious concerns about a lack of progress may result in further
inspections or other quality assurance activity.

6.

The QA team aims to send an initial draft of the inspection report to the provider within two months of the conclusion of the inspection. The
provider of the qualification has the opportunity to provide factual corrections on the draft report. Following the production of the final report
the provider is asked to submit observations on, or objections to, the report and the actions listed. Where the inspection panel have
recommended that the programme is sufficient for registration, the Council of the GDC have delegated responsibility to the GDC Registrar
to consider the recommendations of the panel. Should an inspection panel not be able to recommend ‘sufficiency’ or ‘approval’, the report
and observations would be presented to the Council of the GDC for consideration.

7.

The final version of the report and the provider’s observations are published on the GDC website.

24

