INSPECTION REPORT
Education Provider /
Awarding Body:

University of Manchester

Programme / Award /
Qualification:

BSc Oral Health Science

Remit and Purpose:

Full inspection referencing the Standards for
Education to determine the continuing
sufficiency of the award for the purpose of
registration with the GDC as a dental hygienist
therapist

Learning Outcomes:

Preparing for Practice (Dental Hygiene and
Therapy)

Programme Inspection Dates:

22nd and 23rd April 2015

Examination Inspection
Dates:

1st and 2nd June 2015 – Examinations and
Examination Board Meeting

Inspection Panel:

Michael Yates (Chair and Lay Member)
Diane Hunter (DCP Member)
Elizabeth Watts (Dentist Member)

GDC Staff:

James Marshall (Lead)
Ross Scales

Outcome:

Recommended that the University of Manchester
BSc Oral Health Science programme is sufficient
for continued registration as a dental hygienist
therapist

Inspection summary
The inspection panel was pleased with the demonstrable progress the School has made with
many aspects of the BSc in Oral Health Science in recent years. The panel was grateful for
the clear and appropriate documentation and evidence that was provided in advance of the
inspection, with any requests for additional information throughout the inspection process
acted upon in a timely fashion.
The panel noted several areas of good practice during the inspection. The panel agreed that
the well run outreach element of the programme gave the students an excellent opportunity
to gain additional practical clinical experience. The panel also agreed that the use of the
LIFTUPP clinical recording system allowed the School to maintain a vital overview of the
students’ clinical performance across all sites where the students were working.
The panel heard positive feedback from students with regard to the programme in terms of
support, supervision and actions taken by the school in response to issues that they raised.
The panel found that the School could make better use of the LIFTUPP system in order to
capture student reflection more efficiently and effectively throughout the programme.
The panel acknowledged that at the time of the inspection there were difficulties in ensuring
sufficient paediatric patients for students to gain experience with the extraction of primary
teeth and that this issue was not limited to the University of Manchester. However, the panel
was reassured that the School had identified this as a risk and arranged additional clinics for
students at the end of the programme to ensure they had reached the level of a safe
beginner.
The inspectors had no major concerns that required immediate action with the programme
and agreed it was well organised and ensured thorough assessment of students across the
learning outcomes contained within the GDC publication ‘Preparing for Practice’.
The inspectors could clearly see development of students as they moved through the
programme stages and were satisfied that upon graduation the students were fit to practise
as safe beginners.
The panel wishes to thank the staff, students, and external stakeholders involved with the
BSc in Oral Health Science programme for their co-operation and assistance with the
inspection.

Inspection process and purpose of Inspection
1.

As part of its duty to protect patients and promote high standards within the professions
it regulates, the General Dental Council (GDC) quality assures the education and
training of student dentists and dental care professionals (DCPs) at institutions whose
qualifications enable the holder to apply for registration with the GDC and new
qualifications where it is intended that the qualification will lead to registration.

2.

The aim of this quality assurance activity is to ensure that these institutions produce a
new registrant who has demonstrated, on graduation, that he or she has met the
outcomes required for registration with the GDC. This is to ensure that students who
obtain a qualification leading to registration are fit to practise at the level of a safe
beginner.

3.

The inspection focuses on four Standards, with a total of 29 underlying Requirements.
These are contained in the document Standards for Education.

4.

The purpose of this inspection was to make a recommendation to the Council of the
GDC regarding the ‘sufficiency’ of the programme for registration as a dental hygienist
and therapist in the UK. The GDC’s powers are derived under Part II, Section 9 of the
Dentists Act 1984 (as amended) to determine sufficiency of the programme.

5.

Inspection reports may highlight areas of strength and draw attention to areas requiring
improvement and development, including actions that are required to be undertaken by
the provider. Where an action is needed for a Requirement to be met, the term ‘must’ is
used to describe the obligation on the provider to undertake this action. For these
actions the inspectors may stipulate a specific timescale by which the action must be
completed or when an update on progress must be provided. In their observations on
the content of the report, the provider should confirm the anticipated date by which
these actions will be completed. Where an action would improve how a Requirement is
met, the term ‘should’ is used and for these actions there will be no due date stipulated.
Providers will be asked to report on the progress in addressing the required actions
through the annual monitoring process. Serious concerns about a lack of progress may
result in further inspections or other quality assurance activity.

6.

The provider of the qualification has the opportunity to provide factual corrections on the
draft report. Following the production of the final report the provider is asked to submit
observations on, or objections to, the report and the actions listed. Where the inspection
panel have recommended that the programme is sufficient for registration, the Council
of the GDC have delegated responsibility to the GDC Registrar to consider the
recommendations of the panel. Should an inspection panel not be able to recommend
sufficiency, the report and observations would be presented to the Council of the GDC
for consideration.

The Inspection
7.

This report sets out the findings of an inspection of the BSc in Oral Health Science
awarded by the University of Manchester. The GDC publication Standards for Education
(version 1.0 November 2012) was used as a framework for the inspection.

8.

The inspection was comprised of two visits. The first, referred to as the programme
inspection, was carried out on 22 and 23 April 2015. This involved a series of meetings
with programme staff involved in the management, delivery and assessment of the
programme and a selection of the students. The second visit took place on the 1 and 2
June 2015 during which the panel attended the student case presentation examinations
and the examination board meeting.

9.

The report contains the findings of the inspection panel across the two visits and with
consideration to supporting documentation prepared by the School to evidence how the
individual Requirements under the Standards for Education have been met.

Overview of Qualification
10. The BSc in Oral Health Science programme sits within the University of Manchester
School of Dentistry. The programme has an annual current and projected intake of 12

students. The duration of the programme is three years full time. The University of
Manchester School of Dentistry also offers a BDS programme.
11. During the first year of the programme students are introduced to basic sciences, oral
healthcare procedures and procedures in periodontology. In the second year students
attend lectures on oral diseases and undertake clinical procedures in periodontology,
restorative and preventative dentistry. In year three students are required to undertake
practical procedures relating to the integrated care of patients. In addition to this,
throughout the programme students are required to attend outreach clinics at the
Manchester Dental Hospital, Longsight clinic and Moss Side clinic.
12. The programme had been designed to meet the learning outcomes in GDC curriculum
document, Preparing for Practice, which was published in late 2011.

Evaluation of Qualification against the Standards for Education
13. As stated above, the Standards for Education were used as a framework for this
inspection.
14. The provider was requested to undertake a self-evaluation of the programme against
the individual Requirements under the Standards for Education. This involved stating
whether each Requirement is met, partly met or not met and to provide evidence in
support of their evaluation. The inspection panel examined this evidence, requested
further documentary evidence and gathered further evidence from discussions with staff
and students.
15. The inspection panel used the following descriptors to reach a decision on the extent to
which the BSc in Oral Health Science of the University of Manchester meets each
Requirement:
A Requirement is met if:
“There is sufficient appropriate evidence derived from the inspection process. This
evidence provides the inspectors with broad confidence that the provider demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students is supportive
of documentary evidence and the evidence is robust, consistent and not contradictory.
There may be minor deficiencies in the evidence supplied but these are likely to be
inconsequential.”
A Requirement is partly met if:
“Evidence derived from the inspection process is either incomplete or lacks detail and, as
such, fails to convince the inspection panel that the provider fully demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students may not fully
support the evidence submitted or there may be contradictory information in the evidence
provided. There is, however, some evidence of compliance and it is likely that either (a) the
appropriate evidence can be supplied in a short time frame, or, (b) any deficiencies
identified can be addressed and evidenced in the annual monitoring process.”
A Requirement is not met if:
“The provider cannot provide evidence to demonstrate a Requirement or the evidence
provided is not convincing. The information gathered at the inspection through meetings
with staff and students does not support the evidence provided or the evidence is
inconsistent and/or incompatible with other findings. The deficiencies identified are such as

to give rise to serious concern and will require an immediate action plan from the provider.
The consequences of not meeting a Requirement in terms of the overall sufficiency of a
programme will depend upon the compliance of the provider across the range of
Requirements and the possible implications for public protection.

Standard 1 – Protecting patients
Providers must be aware of their duty to protect the public. Providers must ensure that
patient safety is paramount and care of patients is of an appropriate standard. Any risk
to the safety of patients and their care by students must be minimised
Requirements
Met
Partly Not
met
met
1. Students will provide patient care only when they have
demonstrated adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical

procedures, the student should be assessed as competent in
the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients
2. Patients must be made aware that they are being treated by
students and give consent



3. Students will only provide patient care in an environment
which is safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with
relevant legislation and requirements regarding patient care



4. When providing patient care and services, students are to be
supervised appropriately according to the activity and the
student’s stage of development.



5. Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained.
Clinical supervisors must have appropriate general or
specialist registration with a regulatory body



6. Students and those involved in the delivery of education and
training must be encouraged to raise concerns if they identify
any risks to patient safety



7. Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be
taken by the provider



8. Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and
apply as required. The content and significance of the student
fitness to practise procedures must be conveyed to students
and aligned to GDC student fitness to practise guidance. Staff
involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar
with the GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance.



GDC comments
Requirement 1: Students will provide patient care only when they have demonstrated
adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical procedures, the student should be
assessed as competent in the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients (Requirement Met)
All students must undertake a range of pre-clinical assessments and competencies, which are
recorded in the students log book and signed off by a supervising member of staff.
Documentation was provided that explained what pre-clinical experience a student would
undertake prior to treating any patients. The panel was satisfied that this experience allowed
students to gain and to be able to demonstrate the knowledge and skill required to treat
patients.

Prior to starting work in the clinical environment, students are required to carry out medical
emergency training and undertake the Outreach Student Induction. Students also receive
introductory training in the equipment used in the outreach sites at the start of the programme
and again when they commence their outreach placements.
The culmination of a student’s pre-clinical training is a gateway assessment, where they must
demonstrate an adequate level of experience and knowledge has been achieved. The panel
initially had concerns regarding the lack of clarity as to when this final assessment takes place
and also that first-year students did not appear to have a clear understanding of when the
gateway assessment was scheduled to take place and what is involved. The School clarified
the timeline of the gateway assessment during the examination inspection, however the panel
recommends that this information should be clearly identifiable and available for future
cohorts.
The panel was pleased to see the School has a robust system of managing students who do
not reach the required level of pre-clinical experience. The panel was informed that students
are able to re-sit the failed element of the assessment, however if there are persistent issues
following the resit the student would be referred to the Health and Conduct Committee (HCC),
which is able to consider both professionalism issues and student progression..
Requirement 2: Patients must be made aware that they are being treated by students
and give consent (Requirement Met)
The School utilises a number of methods to ensure patients are aware that they are being
treated by students. All undergraduate students are required to wear blue coloured tunics
when they are on clinic, both at the University of Manchester Dental Hospital and in the
outreach clinics. This enables patients to differentiate undergraduate students from
consultants, who wear black tunics, clinical tutors who wear grey tunics and postgraduate
students who wear purple tunics. Posters are displayed for patients showing which coloured
tunic is worn by the different staff and student groups. In addition to this, all students are
required to wear a name badge, which states their name and ‘The School of Dentistry’.
When a student is providing patient treatment on a restorative clinic at the Dental Hospital, the
patient must sign the ‘Trust Patient Consent Form’ in order for treatment to commence. For
patient treatment being provided on non-restorative clinics, verbal consent is obtained from the
patient, however if further treatment is required, the Trust consent form is completed. Consent
forms are also completed in the outreach clinics, using either a bespoke consent form for the
clinic or the Trust form.
Requirement 3: Students will only provide patient care in an environment which is safe
and appropriate. The provider must comply with relevant legislation and requirements
regarding patient care (Requirement Met)
The panel was provided with evidence of a number of health and safety documents and
policies that are in place for students on the BSc programme, including the School of Dentistry
Health and Safety Policy, University – NHS Trust Shared Workplace Policy and Outreach
Health and Safety Policy. In addition to this, the panel received copies of all recent meeting
minutes from the Dental Health and Safety Board and provided with access to patient care
audit reports.
The panel was informed that the School carries out regular quality assurance inspection visits
to the outreach placement clinics. The results of these visits are reported back to the
Undergraduate Programme Committee via the annual Outreach Visit Report. The panel was
provided with a copy of the latest 2014 report.

Requirement 4: When providing patient care and services, students are to be
supervised appropriately according to the activity and the student’s stage of
development (Requirement Met)
The panel was provided with details of the BSc student timetable and the staff to student ratio
on the clinics and agreed that students provide patient care with adequate and appropriate
supervision. In addition to this, while working on the clinic, all undergraduate students work in
pairs, resulting in one being the operator while treating the patient with the other assisting.
The panel was pleased that there is a flexible working arrangement for clinical tutors on the
clinic, resulting in a large pool of tutors available who can spend additional time with students if
necessary, without there being an increased risk of a patient safety issue arising.
Requirement 5: Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained. Clinical
supervisors must have appropriate general or specialist registration with a regulatory
body (Requirement Met)
All clinical tutors at the School of Dentistry are required to be GDC registrants. Tutors not
employed directly by the School are required to provide evidence of their GDC registration by
annually submitting a copy of their GDC registration certificate to their employer. A list of all
teaching staff at the School of Dentistry, Dental Hospital and the outreach clinics was supplied
detailing the qualifications, training and GDC registration information of staff.
The panel received information on three teaching staff training sessions that had taken place
during 2014. These training sessions covered a variety of topics, including developing a
consistent approach to teaching, learning and assessment, recognising the importance of
feedback, assessment, reflection and communication, considering the student experience and
understand how LIFTUPP can be used to enhance the experience.
Requirement 6: Students and those involved in the delivery of education and training
must be encouraged to raise concerns if they identify any risks to patient safety
(Requirement Met)
The panel was provided with evidence of a number of policies that the School has in place to
ensure that students and those involved in the delivery of education are aware of their
responsibility to raise concerns. These policies include the Whistleblowing Policy, Incident
Reporting Policy and the School of Dentistry Policy on Raising Concerns.
The panel was assured in meetings with the students that they were aware of their
responsibility to raise concerns where necessary and were able to give examples of this
occurring. The students also informed the panel that they were required to undertake elearning teaching covering whistleblowing and raising concerns.
Requirement 7: Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be taken by
the provider (Requirement Met)
In the event of patient safety issues arising, the School follows the Incident Reporting
Validation policy. All serious untoward incidents are also reported via the NHS Incident Report
and the panel received the February 2014 version of this. The Schools incident logs, which
listed all actions taken by the School were also provided as evidence. The panel was satisfied
that, based on the evidence provided, the School would take appropriate action, effectively
and efficiently, when a patient safety issue arises.
Requirement 8: Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and apply as
required. The content and significance of the student fitness to practise procedures

must be conveyed to students and aligned to GDC student fitness to practise guidance.
Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar with the GDC Student
Fitness to Practise Guidance (Requirement Met)
The panel was informed that fitness to practise, ethics and professionalism are areas that are
extensively covered across the programme. Students receive their first introduction to fitness
to practise during their Affirmation Ceremony at the commencement of their studies. This
introduction is then bolstered by further lectures on professionalism in addition to e-learning
teaching on fitness to practise, ethics and professionalism.
The School follows the fitness to practise Conduct and Discipline Policy, which is available for
staff and students on the University of Manchester website. Any incidents must also follow the
Faculty Procedure for a Committee on Fitness to Practise. The panel was informed that there
have been no fitness to practise cases involving BSc Oral Health Science students, however
the panel was provided with examples of the School using the policies and procedures for
BDS students, enabling the panel to see the policy working satisfactorily in practice.
Actions
Req.
Number

1

Actions for the provider
The School should ensure that students are provided with
clear information on the content and timing of the pre-clinical
gateway assessments will take place.

Due date
(if applicable)

Standard 2 – Quality evaluation and review of the programme
The provider must have in place effective policy and procedures for the monitoring and
review of the programme
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
9. The provider will have a framework in place that details how it
manages the quality of the programme which includes

making appropriate changes to ensure the curriculum
continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and
adapts to changing legislation and external guidance. There
must be a clear statement about where responsibility lies for
this function
10. The provider will have systems in place to quality assure
placements
11. Any problems identified through the operation of the quality
management framework must be addressed as soon as
possible
12. Should quality evaluation of the programme identify any
serious threats to the students achieving learning outcomes
through the programme, the GDC must be notified at the
earliest possible opportunity







13. Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external
quality assurance procedures



14. External examiners must be utilised and must be familiar with
the learning outcomes and their context. Providers should
follow QAA guidelines on external examining where
applicable



15. Providers must consider and, where appropriate, act upon
concerns raised or formal reports on the quality of education
and assessment



GDC comments
Requirement 9: The provider will have a framework in place that details how it manages
the quality of the programme which includes making appropriate changes to ensure the
curriculum continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and adapts to
changing legislation and external guidance. There must be a clear statement about
where responsibility lies for this function (Requirement Met)
The panel was informed that there are a number of committees in place that form the structure
of a quality management framework. The primary committee that oversees programme quality
at the School is the Undergraduate Programme Committee (UPC), which is chaired by the
Director of Undergraduate Education and has representatives from both the BDS and BSc
programmes. In addition to this, the UPC also has student representation from the Manchester
Dental Student Society along with input from the Director of Evidence Based Dentistry, the
Lead for Student Experience, the chair of the eLearning Group and the Chair of the
Assessment and Examination Group. As part of its role, the UPC is responsible for ensuring
the programme is adequately mapped to the GDCs Learning Outcomes and the panel was

provided evidence of this. The panel was also provided with minutes of the monthly UPC
meetings.
The panel was pleased to be informed that the School has recently introduced a BSc
Programme Committee to look specifically at issues relating to the BSc programme. The panel
was aware that this programme committee is still in its infancy and agrees that the School
should continue with this good work to ensure local issues are managed efficiently and
effectively before being raised with the UPC.
In addition to the Undergraduate and BSc Programme Committees, the programme is also
under the supervision of the Faculty Undergraduate Teaching and Learning Committee
(UTLC). The Director of Education represents the School at these meetings and the panel was
provided with a recent set of minutes.
Another committee that forms part of the framework is the Outreach Teachers Group, which
the panel agreed was an excellent vehicle to obtain feedback from the outreach centres on a
regular basis and to report back on any issues that had arisen. The panel was provided with
minutes from the meetings of this group.
Requirement 10: The provider will have systems in place to quality assure placements
(Requirement Met)
Students are required to carry out placements at a number of outreach facilities, including the
Manchester Dental Hospital, Moss Side Outreach clinic and Longsight Outreach clinic. The
panel was pleased to see that all placement providers are required to sign the BSc Provider
Agreement document, which includes key contact details, student and placement provider
responsibilities, a health and safety checklist and learning objectives for the placement. A copy
of the agreement was made available for the panel to review.
The School has recently introduced the policy ‘Quality Assurance Outreach Clinical
Placements’ to formalise the quality assurance process and the latest ‘Outreach Visit Report’
was provided to the panel. The panel was satisfied with the positive steps the School has
taken to ensure placements are appropriately quality assured.
In addition to the policy noted above, feedback on the placements is regularly sought from
students and patients. Students are able to feedback via a range of mechanisms, including
the Student Staff Liaison Committee (SSLC), by providing feedback directly to the BSc Year
Leads, who feed into the BSc OHS Programme Committee, via the University administered
‘Unit Evaluation Questionnaire’ and by completing the National Student Survey (NSS)
questionnaire.
The outreach clinics regularly seek feedback from patients and the panel was provided with a
recent copy of the ‘Patient Satisfaction Survey’. The School was trialling a new patient
feedback form at the time of the inspection, which can be read electronically, with the aim of
increasing the ease of data collection.
Requirement 11: Any problems identified through the operation of the quality
management framework must be addressed as soon as possible (Requirement Met)
The panel was satisfied that the quality management framework, as noted above in
Requirement 9, is sufficient to ensure any problems identified are addressed as soon as
possible.

Requirement 12: Should quality evaluation of the programme identify any serious
threats to the students achieving learning outcomes through the programme, the GDC
must be notified at the earliest possible opportunity (Requirement Met)
The panel was reassured that the School has sufficient mechanisms in place to notify the
GDC, should serious threats to the students achieving the learning outcomes through the
programme. This would be done by the Dental Senior Management Team or through the GDC
Annual Monitoring process for less serious threats.
Requirement 13: Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external quality
assurance procedures (Requirement Met)
The panel was informed that the last University Periodic Review of the School’s undergraduate
programmes took place in 2009. This review was undertaken by both internal and external
panel members. The panel was provided with a copy of the report and the actions taken by the
School following the review. The next Periodic Review was scheduled to take place at the end
of 2015.
The School utilises the External Examiners to provide feedback on the programme. In
addition to this, the National Student Survey and the SSLC both provide a useful tool for the
School to utilise.
Any issues identified from either internal or external quality assurance procedures are raised
initially at the BSc Programme Committee and subsequently reported to the Undergraduate
Programme Committee.
Requirement 14: External examiners must be utilised and must be familiar with the
learning outcomes and their context. Providers should follow QAA guidelines on
external examining where applicable (Requirement Met)
The School currently has two External Examiners in post who now carry out purely a quality
assurance role. Up until 2014, the External Examiners were also responsible for examining
during the programme, including during the final case presentation examination.
The panel was provided with a copy of the External Examiner role profile, which acts as the
agreement between the University of Manchester and the External Examiner. The University
also has its own specific External Examiner Agreement. The panel agreed that the External
Examiners currently utilised on the programme were appropriate for their role.
Requirement 15: Providers must consider and, where appropriate, act upon concerns
raised or formal reports on the quality of education and assessment (Requirement Met)
The panel felt that the School takes a positive approach to acting upon concerns raised or
formal reports on the programme. The panel noted that a number of the actions from the
recent GDC inspection report of the BDS programme at the University of Manchester have fed
into the management of the BSc OHS programme and have had a positive effect.
The School has in place an ‘External Examiner Formal Response Process’ to manage all
external examiner reports and comments. The panel was satisfied that the School takes
feedback from the external examiners seriously, for example, the recent changes to the role of
the External Examiner and the content of the case presentation examination were all made in
response to external examiner comments.
Actions

Req.
Number
9

Actions for the provider
The School should continue to develop the role of the BSc
Programme Committee.

Due date
(if applicable)

Standard 3– Student assessment
Assessment must be reliable and valid. The choice of assessment method must be
appropriate to demonstrate achievement of the GDC learning outcomes. Assessors
must be fit to perform the assessment task
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
16. To award the qualification, providers must be assured that
students have demonstrated attainment across the full range

of learning outcomes, at a level sufficient to indicate they are
safe to begin practice. This assurance should be underpinned
by a coherent approach to aggregation and triangulation, as
well as the principles of assessment referred to in these
standards.
17. The provider will have in place management systems to plan,
monitor and record the assessment of students throughout
the programme against each of the learning outcomes
18. Assessment must involve a range of methods appropriate to
the learning outcomes and these should be in line with
current practice and routinely monitored, quality assured and
developed





19. Students will have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and will undertake each activity relating
to patient care on sufficient occasions to enable them to
develop the skills and the level of competency to achieve the
relevant GDC learning outcomes
20. The provider should seek to improve student performance by
encouraging reflection and by providing feedback1.





21. Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills,
experience and training to undertake the task of assessment,
appropriate general or specialist registration with a regulatory
body



22. Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent
to which assessment processes are rigorous, set at the
correct standard, ensure equity of treatment for students and
have been fairly conducted



23. Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear
criteria. Standard setting must be employed for summative
assessments



24. Where appropriate, patient/peer/customer feedback
should contribute to the assessment process
25. Where possible, multiple samples of performance must
be taken to ensure the validity and reliability of the
assessment conclusion





1 Reflective practice should not be part of the assessment process in a way that risks effective student use

26. The standard expected of students in each area to be
assessed must be clear and students and staff involved
in assessment must be aware of this standard



GDC comments
Requirement 16: To award the qualification, providers must be assured that students
have demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes, at a level
sufficient to indicate they are safe to begin practice. This assurance should be
underpinned by a coherent approach to aggregation and triangulation, as well as the
principles of assessment referred to in these standards (Requirement Met)
The panel was satisfied that, based on the evidence provided both in advance of and during
the inspection, students have been able to demonstrate attainment across the full range of
learning outcomes. The panel was provided with a mapping table detailing how each GDC
learning outcome is assessed throughout the programme and were impressed to see the
LIFTUPP clinical data recording system had the functionality to map clinical procedures
undertaken against the School’s and GDC’s learning outcomes.
The panel was pleased to note the School is utilising the clinical alert functionality on LIFTUPP.
This allows the School to record, through the assessment of clinical procedures on LIFTUPP,
any incident that may pose a risk to patient safety. The School will then take the necessary
action to remediate the student.
With the exception of gaining experience with primary tooth extractions from paediatric patients
as noted in Requirement 19, below, the panel was reassured by the clear student progression
data for the last three years of the programme, in addition to the sign-up meeting minutes. The
panel was satisfied that students would have attained the required level of competency prior to
progressing to the next level of the programme, or being entered for the final examination.
The School has recently introduced an Assessment and Examinations Group. The panel felt
this group would give a greater element of quality assurance to the assessment process.
Requirement 17: The provider will have in place management systems to plan, monitor
and record the assessment of students throughout the programme against each of the
learning outcomes (Requirement Partly Met)
The panel was pleased to see the School now utilising the LIFTUPP and CEDAR recording
systems for all cohorts of the programme. Prior to the implementation of LIFTUPP, all
formative clinical assessment data was recorded using a paper-based logbook, however from
the start of the academic year 2013/14, the School has solely been using the electronic system
for recording this data, negating the potential risk of paper logbooks being damaged or mislaid
and allowing better data analysis.
The panel was informed that LIFTUPP is now being used in all of the outreach placement
settings, ensuring the standardised recording of students’ clinical achievement is maintained
across all clinical settings throughout the programme.
While the panel agreed that School had made good progress to ensure the multiple choice
questions (MCQs) had been mapped to the GDC Learning Outcomes with a bank of questions
available on LIFTUPP, the inspectors were concerned that blueprinting had not been carried
out for the other assessment methods. The School must ensure that all assessments are
adequately mapped to the GDC Learning Outcomes and for this reason the requirement is
partly met.

Requirement 18: Assessment must involve a range of methods appropriate to the
learning outcomes and these should be in line with current practice and routinely
monitored, quality assured and developed (Requirement Met)
The School uses a range of assessment methods across the learning outcomes, which are
routinely reviewed and quality assured to ensure they remain appropriate and effective.
As part of the ongoing review process into the assessment methods used, the panel was
informed that the School is considering reviewing its use of the Critically Appraised Topic
assessment, to be replaced with a more suitable and appropriate alternative assessment.
Additionally, the panel was told that the School is reviewing its use of case presentations
during the Year 3 final examination. The panel is supportive of the School’s consideration to
start using unseen case presentations as a possible alternative assessment method in the
future.
During the programme and examination inspections, the panel was encouraged to see the
School is now actively seeking, and is supportive of, a greater involvement from the Year
Leads with regards to assessment setting. The panel agrees that the School should continue
to encourage the Year Leads to have an active involvement in the programme and assessment
development.
Requirement 19: Students will have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and will undertake each activity relating to patient care on
sufficient occasions to enable them to develop the skills and the level of competency to
achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes (Requirement Partly Met)
The panel recognised the investment the School has recently made in implementing the
LIFTUPP system and felt this was a positive step in ensuring all data on a student’s clinical
performance is captured in one central location. Clinical data from all the outreach centres is
also recorded on LIFTUPP, reducing the risk of data loss between the outreach clinics and the
School, as noted in Requirement 17.
While the panel appreciated that improvements have been made to ensure all students
achieve an appropriate exposure to patients and procedures, they remain concerned that a
number of students were still completing their paediatric clinical experience after the final
examinations had taken place. The panel acknowledged the nationwide challenges in
achieving an appropriate exposure to paediatric patients and accepts that the School ensured
all students were given extra opportunities in clinics, outside the timetabled allocation, to
ensure they received enough experience. In future, the School must ensure all students are
given the opportunity to gain sufficient experience with paediatric patients throughout the
programme, in order to mitigate the need to provide extra clinical sessions at the very end of
the course. As there is a risk that suitable patients might not be found for these ‘last-minute’
sessions and, therefore a risk of students not achieving the relevant learning outcomes at the
end of the programme, this requirement is partly met.
Requirement 20: The provider should seek to improve student performance by
encouraging reflection and by providing feedback (Requirement Met)
The panel was informed that with the use of the LIFTUPP system, students should be able to
receive more specific and appropriate feedback in a timely fashion. The inspectors agreed that
using the system is an improvement on previous paper-based recording systems, enabling
students to receive immediate feedback on their delivery of clinical care and were pleased to
note that, in general, the students have had a positive experience of using LIFTUPP for
receiving feedback, despite some initial teething problems during the implementation of the
system.

The panel agreed that while LIFTUPP is being utilised well for feedback, better use could be
made of the system for student reflection. This system is capable of capturing student
reflection and the panel felt that the School should explore the use of LIFTUPP in recording
both feedback and student reflection in a single, central location.
Requirement 21: Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills, experience and
training to undertake the task of assessment, appropriate general or specialist
registration with a regulatory body (Requirement Part Met)
The panel was provided with evidence that all members of staff who carried out an assessor or
examiner role were appropriately registered with a regulatory body. A number of internal staff
members were tasked with examining the final year students, however, the inspectors noted
that a number of these were staff members from the BDS programme. While this is not in itself
an issue, the panel felt that the School should make better use of knowledge and experience of
the Year Leads and tutors internal to the School when conducting the case presentation
examinations.
The School had carried out a standardisation exercise in advance of the final examinations the
inspectors welcomed this approach. The panel noted that whilst the examiners were provided
with exam marking sheets, which were of a good standard, they were not used uniformly by
the examiners. The panel agreed that in advance of the next case presentation examinations,
the School must ensure further training and calibration is provided to ensure all examiners are
using the marking sheets provided in the same way. For these reasons this requirement is
partly met.
Requirement 22: Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent to
which assessment processes are rigorous, set at the correct standard, ensure equity of
treatment for students and have been fairly conducted (Requirement Met)
The panel was provided with evidence of the annual reports written by the external examiners
and were pleased to note that suggestions and recommendations for improvements to be
made were acted on by the School. For example, in 2014 the external examiners commented
on the effectiveness of the format and delivery of the final year case presentation examination.
The School subsequently took action to develop a revised final case presentation examination
for 2015, where the paediatric element of the examination was removed and students were
required to present one restorative and one periodontal case.
The panel was satisfied that the external examiners were provided with the examination
papers in advance of the assessment and given an opportunity to provide feedback on the
content.
Requirement 23: Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear criteria.
Standard setting must be employed for summative assessments (Requirement Met)
The panel was pleased to see an active involvement from the external examiners with regards
to the planning and preparation for examinations. The panel was provided with evidence,
corroborated during meetings with the external examiners that they are provided with
examples of assessments that the students are due to take. The external examiners are
actively encouraged to provide feedback to ensure the assessments are fair and appropriate
for the level of the student.
The panel was satisfied with the assessment criteria that the School uses. During the final
case presentation examinations, the examiners were provided with clear criteria to be used
during the examination.

The panel noted that standard setting has been used by the School for several years utilising
the modified Angoff method and felt assured that future reviews of the assessment process,
including standard setting, would be appropriately managed by the Assessment and
Examination Group.
Requirement 24: Where appropriate, patient/peer/customer feedback should
contribute to the assessment process (Requirement Partly Met)
The panel acknowledged the progress the School is making in gaining patient feedback, and
was provided with evidence via the 2015 Patient Experience Report, patient satisfaction survey
and use of the School patient feedback form.
The panel was pleased to hear that the School is continuing to develop this area of work and
recognises the importance of using the LIFTUPP system effectively. This system has the
functionality to allow patient and dental nurse feedback to be recorded against each treatment.
The panel agreed that the School must continue to develop this area, by ensuring that patient
and peer feedback is able to contribute effectively and appropriately towards the assessment
process. Until further developments have taken place, this requirement is partly met.
Requirement 25: Where possible, multiple samples of performance must be taken to
ensure the validity and reliability of the assessment conclusion (Requirement Met)
The panel was satisfied that students were assessed on multiple occasions to help ensure the
validity and reliability of the result. The panel was provided with access to the clinical
experience records on LIFTUPP, module assessment results, and overall student attainment
data. The panel was also given the opportunity to attend the final case presentation
examinations.
While the panel was satisfied with the evidence provided, the inspectors agreed that the
School should ensure that all student clinical data is recorded on LIFTUPP as soon as
possible, to ensure there is a contemporaneous record of student performance.
Requirement 26: The standard expected of students in each area to be assessed must
be clear and students and staff involved in assessment must be aware of this standard
(Requirement Met)
The panel was informed that students are provided with information on the assessments they
will be required to carry out during the induction week at the start of the programme and at
subsequent briefing sessions at the beginning of each academic year. The panel was pleased
to see the presentation given to students at the beginning of each year is available for
reference on the eLearning Blackboard website for the remainder of the year.
Students are provided with a copy of the programme handbook, which is also available on
Blackboard. The handbook contains details of the programme content and assessments due
throughout the course. While the panel was satisfied that students had access to information
detailing the assessments and expected standard required, it was noted during meetings with
the students that it would be beneficial for them to have more regular briefings on what is
required throughout the year. The School should ensure that students are made aware of the
standard expected in assessments throughout the programme.

Actions
Req.
Number

Actions for the provider

Due date
(if applicable)

17

The School must ensure that all assessments are mapped to
the GDC Learning Outcomes.

18

The School should continue to encourage the Year Leads to
have an active involvement in the programme and assessment
development, in particular during the final examination.

19

The School must ensure all students are given the opportunity
to gain experience with paediatric patients throughout the
programme, in order to eliminate the risks associated with
providing extra clinical sessions at the very end of the course.

20

The School should explore the use of LIFTUPP in recording
both feedback and student reflection in a single, central
location.
The School must provide further training and calibration to
examiners to ensure all examiners are using the marking sheets
provided to the same standard.

21

24

The School must ensure that patient and peer feedback is able
to contribute effectively and appropriately towards the
assessment process.

25

The School should ensure that all student clinical data is
recorded on LIFTUPP as soon as possible, to ensure there is a
contemporaneous record of student performance.

26

The School should ensure that students are made aware of the
standard expected in assessments throughout the programme.

Update to be
provided
through the
GDC Annual
Monitoring
exercise

Update to be
provided
through the
GDC Annual
Monitoring
exercise

Update to be
provided
through the
GDC Annual
Monitoring
exercise
Update to be
provided
through the
GDC Annual
Monitoring
exercise

Standard 4 – Equality and diversity
The provider must comply with equal opportunities and discrimination legislation and
practice. They must also advocate this practice to students
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
27. Providers must adhere to current legislation and best
practice guidance relating to equality and diversity



28. Staff will receive training on equality and diversity,
development and appraisal mechanisms will include this



29. Providers will convey to students the importance of
compliance with equality and diversity law and principles of
the four UK nations both during training and after they begin
practice



GDC comments
Requirement 27: Providers must adhere to current legislation and best practice
guidance relating to equality and diversity (Requirement Met)
The panel were provided with a copy of the University of Manchester Equality and Diversity
policy, which is readily available to staff and students on the university website. The
university has a dedicated Equality and Diversity Team, who are responsible for the
development and implementation of the Equality and Diversity Strategy and Plan.
In the event of a student declaring any disability on their application to join the programme,
this would be managed by the University Disability Support Officer in collaboration with the
Admissions Lead for the programme. The panel was informed that the School actively
makes adjustments for students with disabilities and saw evidence of this during the
assessment process. The panel was shown evidence of students being provided with
adjustments and support during the programme whist on the clinic.
During the programme all students on the BSc programme are required to complete the
online e-learning module ‘Equality, Diversity and Human Rights’, which is provided by the
NHS and is the same teaching unit that members of staff in the Dental Hospital must
complete as part of their mandatory training.
Requirement 28: Staff will receive training on equality and diversity, development and
appraisal mechanisms will include this (Requirement Met)
The panel was informed that all NHS members of staff and those with honorary NHS
contracts are required to complete a mandatory online equality and diversity training
package, which is monitored as part of the Trust’s annual appraisal system.
All academic and academic support staff are also expected to complete the University’s
equality and diversity module, via the Staff Development and Training Unit. The panel was
provided with a report of staff members who have undertaken this training to date. The panel
was encouraged to hear that this training will be incorporated as a requirement for future
Performance and Development Reviews for staff members who are involved with teaching or
have any contact with undergraduate students.

Requirement 29: Providers will convey to students the importance of compliance with
equality and diversity law and principles of the four UK nations both during training and
after they begin practice (Requirement Met)
As stated in Requirement 27, all students are required to undertake the ‘Equality, Diversity and
Human Rights’ NHS online e-learning module. In addition to this, the panel was provided with
evidence that the GDC Learning Outcomes relating to equality and diversity have been
mapped to the University of Manchester’s own Intended Learning Outcomes, namely ILO 3.40,
which states:
Demonstrate the ability to have a caring and safe approach to adult and child patients both in
communicating and in delivering treatment procedures, recognising issues relating to equality
and diversity and to show a positive attitude towards diversity through the management of
patients from different ethnic and social backgrounds and with impairments.
The School informed the panel that the use of LIFTUPP will enable broad patient
demographics to be recorded in a safe and secure manner.
In addition to the NHS equality and diversity e-learning package, students also undertake the
taught unit ‘Equality, Diversity and Human Rights’ as part of the BSc programme.
Actions
Req.
Number

Actions for the provider

None

Due date
(if applicable)

Summary of Actions
Req.

Actions for the provider

Observations

Due date
(if applicable)

Response from the Provider
Provider to record observations in response to
actions here

1

The School should ensure that students are provided
with clear information on the content and timing of the
pre-clinical gateway assessments will take place.

This information will be emphasised along with the
consequences of failure.

9

The School should continue to develop the role of the
BSc Programme Committee.

The Committee now meets termly and reports to
the
School
Undergraduate
Programme
Committee.
It’s remit relates to student progression, curriculum
development and all operational and strategic
aspects of the Programme.

17

The School must ensure that all assessments are
mapped to the GDC Learning Outcomes.

This has been completed.

18

The School should continue to encourage the Year
Leads to have an active involvement in the

Actioned.

Update to be
provided
through the
GDC Annual
Monitoring
exercise

programme and assessment development, in
particular during the final examination.
19

The School must ensure all students are given the
opportunity to gain experience with paediatric patients
throughout the programme, in order to eliminate the
risks associated with providing extra clinical sessions
at the very end of the course.

Outreach paediatric experience now embedded,
along with an appointment in the near future of
appointment of a Senior Lecturer/Honorary
Consultant in Paediatric Dentistry.

Update to be
provided
through the
GDC Annual
Monitoring
exercise

20

The School should explore the use of LIFTUPP in
recording both feedback and student reflection in a
single, central location.

This is not currently possible as our 2 systems,
LIFTUPP and CEDAR cannot ‘talk’ to each other,
however; we are content with our recording of
feedback and reflection in CEDAR and we are
looking at alternatives to LIFTUPP as a clinical
assessment tool.

21

The School must provide further training and
calibration to examiners to ensure all examiners are
using the marking sheets provided to the same
standard.

Completed and will have been actioned by the next
diet.

Update to be
provided
through the
GDC Annual
Monitoring
exercise

24

The School must ensure that patient and peer
feedback is able to contribute effectively and
appropriately towards the assessment process.

Working with our partner Trusts to facilitate this.

Update to be
provided
through the
GDC Annual
Monitoring
exercise

25

The School should ensure that all student clinical data
is recorded on LIFTUPP as soon as possible, to
ensure there is a contemporaneous record of student
performance.

Actioned.

26

The School should ensure that students are made
aware of the standard expected in assessments
throughout the programme.

An online resource for students similar to that
produced for the BDS students will be in place for
the next diet.

Observations from the provider on content of report
The School of Dentistry is pleased that the actions from the report will help to further improve the programme.

Recommendation to the GDC
The inspectors recommend that this qualification is approved for holders to apply for registration as a dental hygienist and dental therapist with
the General Dental Council.

