INSPECTION REPORT
Education provider/ Awarding
Body:

Programme/Award:
Remit and purpose:

Education Provider: Birmingham Community
Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust
Awarding Body (Validation of BSc Degree):
University of Birmingham
BSc in dental hygiene and therapy
Diploma in Dental Hygiene
Full inspection referencing the Standards for
Education to determine approval of the award for
the purpose of registration with the GDC as a
dental hygienist/therapist

Learning Outcomes:

Preparing for Practice (dental hygiene/dental
therapy)

Programme inspection dates:

27 & 28 April 2016

Examination inspection
dates:

13 & 14 June 2016

Inspection panel:

Annie Turner (Chair and Lay Member)
Hayley Lawrence (DCP Member)
Raj Majithia (Dentist Member)

GDC Staff:

Peter Butler

Outcome:

Recommended that the BSc continues to be
approved for the graduating cohort to register as
dental hygienists and dental hygienists/therapists

1

Full details of the inspection process can be found in the annex
Inspection summary
The BSc in Dental Hygiene and Therapy validated by the University of Birmingham and
provided by the Birmingham School of Dental Hygiene and Therapy, provides students with
a sound educational experience. All but two of the 21 Requirements set out in the GDC’s
Standards for Education have been fully met. There is a strong pre-clinical course which sets
students on the right track as they move to treating patients. They are well supervised by an
enthusiastic and supportive staff team. The progress of students, both academically and
clinically, is well monitored and aspects of the programme requiring improvements have
been identified. Much work has already been undertaken to review and update
assessments. There are excellent opportunities for students to reflect on the work they have
undertaken and this was seen as a major strength of the programme.
The School is, in common with other similar institutions, struggling to meet some clinical
learning outcomes due to patient shortages. The School needs to act quickly to ensure these
shortcomings are addressed.

Background and overview of Qualification
Annual intake
Programme duration
Format of programme

28students
120 weeks over 3years
Year
1: knowledge of biomedical sciences,
behavioural sciences, dental materials,
restorative dentistry, simulated skills of
dental hygiene, treatment of adult patients
requiring periodontal treatment, phantom
head restorative skills, oral health
promotion, professionalism
2: simulated clinical experience of
restorative dentistry, restorative dentistry on
adults and children, applied pharmacology,
radiography, periodontology, paediatric
dentistry
3: direct patient treatment within
Birmingham Dental Hospital and on
outreach, oral medicine, research project

The panel wishes to thank the staff, students, and external stakeholders involved with the
BSc programme for their co-operation and assistance with the inspection.

2

Standard 1 – Protecting patients
Providers must be aware of their duty to protect the public. Providers must ensure that
patient safety is paramount and care of patients is of an appropriate standard. Any risk
to the safety of patients and their care by students must be minimised.
Requirements
Met
Partly Not
met
met
1. Students must provide patient care only when they have
demonstrated adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical
✓
procedures, the student should be assessed as competent in
the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients.
2. Providers must have systems in place to inform patients that
they may be treated by students and the possible implications
of this. Patient agreement to treatment by a student must be
obtained and recorded prior to treatment commencing.

✓

3. Students must only provide patient care in an environment
which is safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with
relevant legislation and requirements regarding patient care,
including equality and diversity, wherever treatment takes
place.

✓

4. When providing patient care and services, providers must
ensure that students are supervised appropriately according to
the activity and the student’s stage of development.

✓

5. Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained.
This should include training in equality and diversity
legislation relevant for the role. Clinical supervisors must
have appropriate general or specialist registration with a
UK regulatory body.

✓

6. Providers must ensure that students and all those involved in
the delivery of education and training are aware of their
obligation to raise concerns if they identify any risks to patient
safety and the need for candour when things go wrong.
Providers should publish policies so that it is clear to all
parities how concerns will be raised and how these concerns
will be acted upon. Providers must support those who do raise
concerns and provide assurance that staff and students will
not be penalised for doing so.

✓

7. Systems must be in place to identify and record issues that may
affect patient safety. Should a patient safety issue arise,
appropriate action must be taken by the provider and where
necessary the relevant regulatory body should be notified.

✓

8. Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and
apply as required. The content and significance of the student
fitness to practise procedures must be conveyed to students
and aligned to GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance.

✓

3

Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be
familiar with the GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance.
Providers must also ensure that the GDC’s Standards for the
Dental Team are embedded within student training.

Requirement 1: Students must provide patient care only when they have demonstrated
adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical procedures, the student should be
assessed as competent in the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients. (Requirement Met)
There is a strong pre-clinical course in place at the School. Students commence working on
phantom heads at an early stage in the programme so they immediately begin to get a feel for
clinical work. Students are expected to treat their phantom head as if it were a real patient in
order to encourage professional attitudes and working practises. Students displayed a real
enthusiasm for experiencing the reality of practice on patients.
Students undertake practical training sessions using their peers. This involves breaking down
each patient visit to its component parts and, as part of this, they will carry out clinical tasks
such as intra-oral examinations and probing and scaling on each other. Students are required
to complete a competency assessment before working on each other. Students are formatively
assessed and receive verbal and written feedback from the start of their phantom head
teaching and supervised practice on their peers. This enables tutors to chart the progress of
students and offer remedial teaching where necessary, to prepare all students for the gateway
assessments before patients are treated.
Students undertake ‘gateway assessments’ at various stages of the programme. These are
aligned to learning outcomes and include Structured Clinical Operative Tests (SCOTs) which
assess life-saving skills and manual dexterity. Students felt they had adequate preparation
before commencing work on real patients.
Requirement 2: Providers must have systems in place to inform patients that they may
be treated by students and the possible implications of this. Patient agreement to
treatment by a student must be obtained and recorded prior to treatment commencing.
(Requirement Met)
Letters sent to patients make clear that treatment may be carried out by students. There is
clear signage throughout the dental hospital which explains that students are being trained
and may be involved in treating patients. Students wear clear ID and uniforms both in the
school and when in outreach locations. Patients are screened for their suitability to received
treatment from undergraduate students and this process includes patients receiving advice
on the advantages and disadvantages of being treated by students.
Within the dental hospital, written consent is only required for extractions. Verbal consent is
recorded for all treatment. In outreach, patients will sign their consent before treatment is
undertaken.
Students are provided with lectures which cover age-related consent and mental capacity
issues relevant to gaining consent. This is covered in general in Year One and then, in much
more detail, in Year Two. The panel were told that students are more likely to interact with
patients with special needs in outreach placements. Tutors will oversee students gaining
verbal consent and must take written consent themselves.

4

Staff cover consent and safeguarding issues as part of their usual training and this is
delivered by the Governance Manager.
Requirement 3: Students must only provide patient care in an environment which is
safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with relevant legislation and
requirements regarding patient care, including equality and diversity, wherever
treatment takes place. (Requirement Met)
Birmingham Dental Hospital is part of the Birmingham Community Healthcare NHS
Foundation Trust (BCHC). Most outreach clinics fall within the Combined Dental Services of
BCHC. Two of the outreach clinics are hosted by a neighbouring Community Dental Service
in the Heart of England NHS Foundation Trust (HOE). Copies of Trust policies were provided
in advance of the inspection. Students can access all policies and the student handbook
provides information about them.
Quality and Governance Reports produced by the Combined Dental Services demonstrate
compliance with Care Quality Commission (CQC) requirements and detail any external
reviews undertaken regarding patient safety issues, risks or patient incidents.
The school undertakes annual audits of all clinics where students undertake patient care,
both within and outside the hospital setting. This helps to provide support for outreach tutors
and enables any queries or training needs to be highlighted and addressed. These reports
and their resulting action plans are reported at Curriculum Development Committee (CDC)
meetings.
The school ensures that issues relating to equality and diversity are covered via admissions
to the programme, through academic teaching and learning as well as through practical
experience. Admission interviews contain practical stations which cover equality and
diversity issues and students are also invited to highlight any need for adjustments they
may require during their interviews. Staff will make any adjustment that is required as long
as whatever difficulty a student may be faced with does not preclude them from working
upon graduation. Support and extra time for assessments is available for those with
learning difficulties.
Requirement 4: When providing patient care and services, providers must ensure that
students are supervised appropriately according to the activity and the student’s stage
of development. (Requirement Met)
Normally, the ratio of supervising tutor to student is 1:5 or better (i.e. a maximum of 5 students
to each tutor). On outreach clinics, the ratio of outreach supervisor to operating students is 1:3
or better (students work in pairs on outreach, taking it in turn to operate and then to assist their
colleagues). Policies and procedures for supervising clinics are provided in the staff handbook
and in the outreach placement tutors handbook. Supervision issues may be raised at staff
training days.
Students are encouraged to approach any member of staff if they feel they are struggling or
need support as they move from the pre-clinical to clinical environment and an open door
policy is in place. Welfare Officers are also available to students via University Student
Services and this facility is completely separate to the programme. Where students are
experiencing difficulties, they are likely to see their Personal Tutor on a more regular basis.
Normally, students meet with their Personal Tutor to discuss their progress on a termly basis.
The diverse skill mix of the teaching team is seen by the school as a real benefit to students.
They are able to benefit from the varied knowledge of a range of staff and, in the case of many
5

part-time members of staff, integrate with and learn from people who are actually out doing the
job in the ‘real world’.
Requirement 5: Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained. This should
include training in equality and diversity legislation relevant for the role. Clinical
supervisors must have appropriate general or specialist registration with a UK
regulatory body. (Requirement Met)
One of the key assets of the programme senior staff were extremely keen to stress to the panel
of inspectors was the strength of the teaching team which has recently been expanded to include
additional full time members of staff. Additionally, many of the part time members of the teaching
team have worked within the school for many years and have, therefore, obtained excellent
levels of experience of teaching elements of the programme as well as providing stability. All
teaching staff have completed mandatory Trust training and attend annual staff development
days. Staff training days will include group discussions on decision making and analysis of
logbook marking to identify ‘hawks’ and ‘doves’. A peer review system is also in place within the
school and this is being rolled out to outreach centres.
Staff receive training on how to recognise there is an issue with a student which needs
escalating. In the first instance, their Personal Tutor will be involved. The inspectors formed the
view that the staff are particularly good at empathising with students and understanding their
individual needs.
New staff shadow more experienced members of the team and they decide in their own time
when they feel ready to ‘go it alone’. They are provided with a guide book covering the grading
scheme and how to apply it. Each new tutor will also be assigned a mentor to assist them.
Outreach tutors spend time at the school which helps them to gain an understanding of how
things are done and this aids with consistency of experience when students are on placements.
Outreach tutors are encouraged to undertake medical education training although this is not
compulsory. Similarly, staff within the school are encouraged to achieve an educational
qualification. The University is looking at whether to make this mandatory in future.
Requirement 6: Providers must ensure that students and all those involved in the
delivery of education and training are aware of their obligation to raise concerns if they
identify any risks to patient safety and the need for candour when things go wrong.
Providers should publish policies so that it is clear to all parties how concerns should
be raised and how these concerns will be acted upon. Providers must support those
who do raise concerns and provide assurance that staff and students will not be
penalised for doing so. (Requirement Met)
In the wake of the recommendations of the Francis Report, BCHC Trust produced updated
policies and procedures as part of their action plan. Information was issued to staff and students
relating to the duty of candour and the requirements placed upon them to be honest with patients
in explaining and apologising when accidents and untoward incidents occur during patient care.
Datix, a patient safety and risk management software system, is used to record and monitor
issues and incidents. Action plans are created in response to any patient safety incidents which
occur. These are monitored by the school’s Management Committee.
Student handbooks and lectures cover the need for students to raise concerns about anything
that is going wrong or anything they are concerned about. Scenarios are used during the
professionalism module. A law and ethics workshop utilises scenario based teaching to
encourage discussion and to develop understanding of the duty of candour and the importance
of raising patient safety concerns.
6

Support mechanisms are in place for students who may need to raise a concern as the school
are highly aware of the implications for students in terms of how daunting such a situation can
be. Staff endeavour to foster a culture of openness and encourage students and staff to speak
frankly. Any information relating to raising concerns can be raised via the Curriculum
Development committee as well as the Staff Student Liaison Committee and via individual
approach to staff members
Requirement 7: Systems must be in place to identify and record issues that may affect
patient safety. Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be taken by
the provider and where necessary the relevant regulatory body should be notified.
(Requirement Met)
Feedback which highlights concerns over patient safety may be raised and escalated through
the school to the BCHC Trust and to the University of Birmingham Fitness to practise
committee if required. All recorded incidents are followed up by the school and a log kept of
the outcomes of investigations and actions taken. If an incident involving a student raises
queries over patient safety, the incident is then considered and logged under the ‘expression
of concern’ system. This will involve an interview between the student concerned and the
Programme Lead.
Continued concerns over the behaviour or performance of individual students or general
concerns regarding patient safety may be discussed at team meetings or at staff development
days.
The panel were given examples of actions taken when issues around patient safety had come
to light. These examples included remedial teaching and follow-up meetings with Student
Services for a student who had caused the laceration of a patient’s lip. The Governance
Manager receives reports on datix incidents and may raise queries with the Programme Lead
regarding the handling of particular incidents. The Programme Lead is responsible for
monitoring the repetition of clinical incidents and the management of this.
Requirement 8: Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and apply as
required. The content and significance of the student fitness to practise procedures
must be conveyed to students and aligned to GDC Student Fitness to Practise
Guidance. Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar with the
GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance. Providers must also ensure that the GDC’s
Standard for the Dental Team are embedded within student training. (Requirement Met)
Students are introduced to the GDC Standards for the Dental Team and the concept of Fitness
to Practise (FtP) early in their studies starting with the first year professionalism module and
then through lectures and workshops. In Year Two and Three, successful completion of the
professionalism assignments is needed before a student can progress.
The school policy mirrors the GDC guidance for providers on Fitness to Practise, and details
the local policies and procedures which apply if a concern is raised, which crosses the
threshold of fitness to practise. The policy details the University code of conduct (which all
students must sign up to) and the fitness to practise procedure which would be followed if a
fitness to practise issue were to arise and be taken to the University of Birmingham fitness to
practise committee.
Students must complete a variety of professionalism scenario assignments. They also
complete a professionalism portfolio which documents their work in this area over the whole
course and demonstrates their understanding and application of the GDC standards.
7

Role play workshops are utilised to allow students to work together exploring challenging
scenarios related to clinical practice where actors play the part of patients. These give the
opportunity for students to apply the GDC Standards under ‘safe’ conditions and to reflect on
their experience afterwards.
Actions
No
Actions for the Provider
5
The peer review system should continue to be rolled out to all
clinical locations, including outreach.

Due date

8

Standard 2 – Quality evaluation and review of the programme
The provider must have in place effective policy and procedures for the monitoring and
review of the programme.
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
9. The provider must have a framework in place that details how
✓
it manages the quality of the programme which includes
making appropriate changes to ensure the curriculum
continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and
adapts to changing legislation and external guidance. There
must be a clear statement about where responsibility lies for
this function.
✓
10. Any concerns identified through the Quality Management
framework, including internal and external reports relating to
quality, must be addressed as soon as possible and the GDC
notified of serious threats to students achieving the learning
outcomes.
11. Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external
quality assurance procedures. External quality assurance
should include the use of external examiners, who should be
familiar with the GDC learning outcomes and their context
and QAA guidelines should be followed where applicable.
Patient and/or customer feedback must be collected and
used to inform programme development.
12. The provider must have effective systems in place to quality
assure placements where students deliver treatment to
ensure that patient care and student assessment across all
locations meets these Standards. The quality assurance
systems should include the regular collection of student and
patient feedback relating to placements.

✓

✓

GDC comments
Requirement 9: The provider must have a framework in place that details how it
manages the quality of the programme which includes making appropriate changes to
ensure the curriculum continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and adapts
to changing legislation and external guidance. There must be a clear statement about
where responsibility lies for this function. (Requirement Met)
The University of Birmingham validates the award of the BSc in Dental Hygiene and Therapy
and Diploma in Dental Hygiene via a collaborative agreement with BCHC NHS Trust. The
university is subject to Higher Education quality assurance controls. A clear Quality Assurance
strategy was provided in advance of the inspection and this sets out where responsibility lies
for the maintenance of the quality the programmes on offer.
The programme curriculum has recently been re-mapped so that it corresponds to the updated
and revised version of Preparing for Practice published by the GDC in 2015. The School have
been working to reduce the number of modules in an effort to improve the overall structure of
the programme and to reduce the number of assessments. There have been some major

9

alterations as a result of this work all of which have been discussed and approved via the
Committee structure.
Staff from the school have, in the past, visited other institutions delivering similar qualifications
in order to gain knowledge and experience to implement changes to the programme.
A student representative attends staff meetings so that they feel included in discussion about
possible changes. Staff told the inspectors that feedback from students is generally very
positive and they struggle to gather any negative feedback.
Requirement 10: Any concerns identified through the Quality Management framework,
including internal and external reports relating to quality, must be addressed as soon
as possible and the GDC notified of serious threats to students achieving the learning
outcomes. The provider will have systems in place to quality assure placements.
(Requirement Met)
The Curriculum Development Committee (CDC) oversees the handling of concerns and issues
raised in relation to the programme. The Committee considers reports of internal audit
procedures such as the annual module audit review as well as reports from the Staff Student
Committee. Arising issues are discussed in detail and action plans will be formulated. Any
changes arising from action plans are communicated via staff development days. A risk
register records any serious threats to the delivery of the programme.
Outreach placements are audited via the CDC. There are two annual training days for staff
working in outreach locations and those met by the panel of inspectors said they felt well
supported by staff at the school who keep in touch, informally, by telephone and by annual
visits. Training days cover assessment and supervision as well as calibration exercises to
ensure students are graded consistently across clinical locations. Outreach staff suggested
that visiting each other’s locations may also assist with this and the school may wish to
consider facilitating this proposal.
Staff told the inspectors that risks and threats are reported to the GDC via the annual
monitoring return they complete.
Requirement 11: Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external quality
assurance procedures. External quality assurance should include the use of external
examiners, who should be familiar with the GDC learning outcomes and their context
and QAA guidelines should be followed where applicable. Patient and/or customer
feedback must be collected and used to inform programme development. (Requirement
Met)
Two External Examiners are appointed and they will look at all assessment documentation in
advance so that they have the opportunity to make comments on the content or suggest
changes to the structure. They attend practical assessments, to observe rather than examine,
and will also look at written examination scripts to ensure fair marking and grading has taken
place. In line with QAA guidelines, they carry out a quality control function. The inspectors
were provided with clear information in advance of the inspection to demonstrate how External
Examiners link to internal QA mechanisms.
An induction programme for External Examiners is conducted by the University and covers
what their role entails and what is expected of them during their tenure. End of year reports
submitted by the External Examiners feed into the annual course review report which sets out
action plans for the future.

10

External Examiner reports are also presented to the Staff Student Liaison Committee so
students are also aware of their views and input into the programme and its development.
An example of a change the inspectors were told about was that essay questions have been
made more specific by linking them to clinical scenarios which help to link the assessment into
assessing what the student actually can ‘do’ on clinic.
External Examiners are consulted by the school when any changes to assessments and
modules are made.
Patient feedback is sought in general terms regarding their overall experience of clinical
treatment within the hospital. Individual patients are asked to feedback regarding specific
treatment received from students and this will be discussed during reflection sessions with
supervising tutors. Feedback is sought from students at the end of each module in order to
inform development. Recent graduates are also asked to provide feedback one year after
completing the programme.
Requirement 12: The provider must have effective systems in place to quality assure
placements where students deliver treatment to ensure that patient care and student
assessment across all locations meets these Standards. The quality assurance systems
should include the regular collection of student and patient feedback relating to
placements. (Requirement Met)
There are annual visits from staff to outreach placements and an audit questionnaire will be
completed. Action plans for any major concerns arising from these audits will be created via
the CDC. Placement tutors are able to comment on the standard of knowledge and skills of the
students who have attended, and to discuss with the visiting tutor any issues or problems
which have arisen or to clarify any queries they may have. This is a particularly good
opportunity for tutors at outreach clinics, to compare their practice with that within the school.
Outreach tutors are provided with a comprehensive induction and have their own handbook
which they can refer to if necessary. They are also required to carry out calibration exercises
during study days. Study days cover supervision skills, assessment criteria and also facilitate
discussion between school and outreach tutors regarding student teaching and to exchange
ideas on how to improve their practice. Outreach tutors are invited to observe teaching within
the school at any time they are able to visit.
Students told the panel that some outreach locations are better than others due to the flow and
influx of patients. All students agreed that they enjoyed the experience of outreach placements
since they gained access to more patients here. Generally, students wanted the programme to
include more outreach opportunities. Students felt that outreach tutors and supervisors did
things differently at each location and the school may wish to investigate this further.
Actions
No
10, 12

12

Actions for the Provider
The school should consider a scheme to allow outreach tutors to
visit one another’s clinics in order to improve the standardisation
of experience and should look at other means of calibration.
The school should investigate the possibility of extending the
outreach scheme.

Due date

11

Standard 3– Student assessment
Assessment must be reliable and valid. The choice of assessment method must be
appropriate to demonstrate achievement of the GDC learning outcomes. Assessors
must be fit to perform the assessment task.
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
13. To award the qualification, providers must be assured that
students have demonstrated attainment across the full range
✓
of learning outcomes, and that they are fit to practise at the
level of a safe beginner. Evidence must be provided that
demonstrates this assurance, which should be supported by
a coherent approach to the principles of assessment referred
to in these standards.
14. The provider must have in place management systems to
plan, monitor and centrally record the assessment of
students, including the monitoring of clinical and/or technical
experience, throughout the programme against each of the
learning outcomes.

✓

15. Students must have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients and procedures and should undertake each activity
relating to patient care on sufficient occasions to enable them
to develop the skills and the level of competency to achieve
the relevant learning outcomes.
16. Providers must demonstrate that assessments are fit for
purpose and deliver results which are valid and reliable. The
methods of assessment used must be appropriate to the
learning outcomes, in line with current and best practice and
be routinely monitored, quality assured and developed.
17. Assessment must utilise feedback collected from a variety of
sources, which should include other members of the dental
team, peers, patients and/or customers.
18. The provider must support students to improve their
performance by providing regular feedback and by
encouraging students to reflect on their practice.

✓

✓

✓

✓

19. Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills,
experience and training to undertake the task of assessment,
including appropriate general or specialist registration with a
UK regulatory body. Examiners/assessors should have
received training in equality and diversity relevant for their
role.

✓

20. Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent
to which assessment processes are rigorous, set at the
correct standard, ensure equity of treatment for students and
have been fairly conducted. The responsibilities of the
external examiners must be clearly documented.

✓

21. Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear
criteria. The standard expected of students in each area

✓

12

to be assessed must be clear and students and staff
involved in assessment must be aware of this standard.
An appropriate standard setting process must be
employed for summative assessments.

GDC comments
Requirement 13: To award the qualification, providers must be assured that students
have demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes, and that they
are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner. Evidence must be provided that
demonstrates this assurance, which should be supported by a coherent approach to the
principles of assessment referred to in these standards. (Requirement Partly Met)
Much work has been undertaken by the Programme Lead to revolutionise and modernise the
assessment structure within the programme. Staff were keen to stress how much of an
improvement this had made to the overall programme. A clear and comprehensive assessment
strategy was provided as part of pre-inspection documentation that clearly demonstrated the
consideration given to the differing modes of assessment utilised throughout the programme
and their reliability.
Dental team working appears to be functioning well at the school. There are opportunities for
Hygiene and Therapy students to refer patients to BDS student colleagues and to receive
feedback on this. Feedback comes from the BDS tutor and students felt it would be useful to
also receive feedback from the BDS students themselves. Some joint pre-clinical training takes
place and this assists with student groups attaining a wider understanding of each other’s
roles. BSc students learn about smoking and cessation advice with BDS and dental nurse
students and they are split from their peer groups to do this. There are plans to extend team
working to include other professions including medics and nurses.
The detailed mapping of the programme against the GDC learning outcomes provided prior to
the inspection, clearly sets out the year, module and methods of summative assessment for
each learning outcome. The school is struggling to achieve some of the clinical learning
outcomes and this is detailed under Requirement 15. For this reason, the panel formed the
view that this requirement is only partly met.

Requirement 14: The provider must have in place management systems to plan, monitor
and centrally record the assessment of students, including the monitoring of clinical
and/or technical experience, throughout the programme against each of the learning
outcomes. (Requirement Met)
Comprehensive mapping and blueprinting of assessments assured the panel of inspectors that
the school has planned and can monitor the progress of students effectively.
The academic and clinical progress of all students is monitored throughout the course.
Students’ achievement in clinical assessment, in particular, is monitored via progress meetings
every term. Students keep a clinical logbook which details their experience and this is also held
centrally in an electronic record. Evidence shown to the inspectors demonstrated that the
school can easily see the current progress of each student, including aspects of the
programme where students are lacking in experience.

13

All modules must be passed in order for students to progress through the programme.
Completion of all modules demonstrates achievement of outcomes and the ability to apply
knowledge and skills and attitudes.
The sign-up procedure utilised by the programme means that a student cannot progress to
finals without having completed all of the mandatory requirements and without showing that all
procedures have been undertaken on sufficient occasions where they were graded as being
competent. Students who do not meet these requirements continue training and are
considered for entry to finals 6 months later. The panel were provided with evidence to show
that students are held back where these requirements are not achieved.
Requirement 15: Students must have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and should undertake each activity relating to patient care on
sufficient occasions to enable them to develop the skills and the level of competency to
achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes. (Requirement Partly Met)
There are some areas of clinical work, such as pulpotomies and stainless steel crowns, where
students are receiving less experience than they should and the School is aware of these
shortcomings. There are plans to expand the patient base available to students within the
School and the inspectors agreed that this should be a priority going forward. Staff at the
School felt that the new hospital location may assist in improving the number of patients
available since it is now in a more residential location. There are plans to build relationships
with local schools to increase the influx of child patients. Students receive a good level of
experience in the general management of child patients.
There is currently a reliance on the use of phantom heads (utilising natural teeth) to ensure
students are gaining experience of refining the skills required to undertake the treatments
where patient numbers are lacking. The inspectors were assured by senior staff that BDS
students were not being given priority over BSc students.
Students felt that the school monitored their clinical experience very closely. They had an
awareness that there were certain procedures where they may lack experience and they
understood the need to work within their own level of competency.
The inspectors formed the view that students on the programme may not be getting as much
clinical time as other similar programmes at other institutions. Students across all year groups
were very vocal, when meeting with the inspection panel, about their desire to have more time
on clinics.
Through discussions with outreach tutors during the inspection, the panel formed the view that
there is a potential and a willingness to expand the outreach provision for the BSc programme.
Given the difficulties in providing adequate patients facing the school, the inspectors agree that
this possibility should be investigated without delay.
Requirement 16: Providers must demonstrate that assessments are fit for purpose and
deliver results which are valid and reliable. The methods of assessment used must be
appropriate to the learning outcomes, in line with current and best practice and be
routinely monitored, quality assured and developed. (Requirement Met)
Written papers have standardised answer guides that are set and approved by the module lead.
Summative assessment blueprints show the topics and outcomes covered each year in each
module. The school can then check to ensure that all topics are assessed over time. Various
types of assessment are used to triangulate results across the programme curriculum. The
intention is to measure knowledge and performance on several occasions for each outcome.
14

The assessment blueprints are monitored to ensure that the content of each module is covered
sufficiently. In this way, the school are able to ensure that assessments are valid and reliable.
All written papers are screened by External Examiners and they are encouraged to make
suggestions for change and improvement, where necessary. The questions are altered if
required and all of the External Examiners comments are answered, in order to agree that the
paper is fit for purpose.
Standard setting of the pass mark is undertaken where possible. The school recognise that
some types of assessment do not lend themselves to standard setting and for these,
standardised marking guides or performance descriptors are employed. The standard setting
methods chosen, such as the Angoff method, are used to ensure that everyone meets the
minimum standard for safe practice as a ‘safe beginner’.
Annual module review reports include data regarding the performance of assessment types.
This includes any comments received from External Examiners, tutors and students and will
set out action plans if these are needed. Assessments are also reviewed for potential
improvements during staff team meetings and staff development and training days.
Requirement 17: Assessment must utilise feedback collected from a variety of sources,
which should include other members of the dental team, peers, patients and/or
customers. (Requirement Met)
Students receive feedback as part of formative assessment during pre-clinical laboratory time.
Written feedback after each patient contact is recorded when students move to working on real
patients. Tutors will include dentists, hygienists and therapists. The dental nurses who work
with the students also oversee clinical set up procedures and cross infection control and will
give verbal feedback to individuals. All feedback is recorded in the students’ clinical
assessment progress folders throughout the programme. Feedback as part of clinical
assessment records continues to be used formatively until the final year.
Generic feedback is gathered throughout the year via a patient questionnaire and the results of
this are available to staff and students electronically. Specific feedback regarding treatment by
students is gathered at the completion of appointments. This feedback is discussed between
student and tutor during the post-treatment discussion and grading and it contributes to the
overall percentage grade given for the appointment. Students are required to collect this
feedback on at least ten separate occasions during Year Two and Three of the programme.
Clear information is given to students explaining how and why patient feedback is used as part
of the assessment of their clinical skills.
Requirement 18: The provider must support students to improve their performance by
providing regular feedback and by encouraging students to reflect on their practice.
(Requirement Met)
Students receive feedback after each patient contact and this generally comes in the form of a
discussion with their tutor. The details of this discussion are recorded in written form for future
reference. There is plenty of space for reflection included in student logbooks.
Tutors’ feedback on grades gives a justification for the decision reached and this helps the
students to understand why they have achieved a certain grade. Feedback on written
assignments is usefully broken down against the marking criteria.
After assessments and examinations, students receive verbal and/or written feedback on their
performance concentrating not only on aspects requiring improving but also on areas where
15

they performed particularly well. Personal tutors also meet with their assigned students after
the termly progress meetings to provide feedback on how they are progressing.
Students met by the inspectors said that they felt they received adequate levels of feedback
during the programme. They liked that the type of feedback they received tended to differ
depending upon the task they had undertaken. They also enjoy the opportunity to undertake
some informal peer review exercises at an early stage in the programme.
The inspectors agreed that reflection on performance was a strong element of the programme
with students being given good guidance on how to be a reflective learner from the start of the
programme through lectures and workshops. Students will provide a short reflective summary
at the end of each patient appointment and this is followed up with a more detailed reflection
on the entire course of treatment once it has been completed. These are then signed off as
completed by tutors.
Requirement 19: Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills, experience and
training to undertake the task of assessment, including appropriate general or specialist
registration with a UK regulatory body. Examiners/ assessors should have received
training in equality and diversity relevant for their role. (Requirement Met)
Calibration of examiner grading is carried out in a variety of ways including staff away days and
through peer review. All outreach placements are visited regularly for discussions regarding
grading. The school acknowledges that it is difficult to completely integrate outreach tutors
given time constraints and work continues to find better ways of achieving this. Outreach tutors
met by the inspectors felt that a way of achieving better calibration and integration would be for
them to swap clinics occasionally.
Staff are actively encouraged to undertake further training to gain qualifications which are
relevant to dental education and there are a number of current tutors who are undertaking
diplomas and Masters degrees. Tutors have GDC registration and therefore undertake
appropriate levels of Continuing Professional Development (CPD) education. New staff must
undertake mandatory training in equality and diversity in line with Trust requirements and this
must be repeated every three years.
New tutors will shadow experienced members of the team in order to gain a full understanding
of the clinical teaching and assessment procedures. There is also a system of peer review in
place which is designed to monitor and improve teaching by sharing good practice across all
learning locations. Outreach tutors also visit the school to learn about teaching, supervision
and grading procedures.
A training workbook for clinical assessment has been introduced and this utilises a number of
case scenarios so that all staff can consider how they should grade students’ work. This also
assists new staff to gain an understanding of the different considerations which go into grading
clinical work carried out during the programme.
Requirement 20: Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent to which
assessment processes are rigorous, set at the correct standard, ensure equity of
treatment for students and have been fairly conducted. The responsibilities of the
external examiners must be clearly documented. (Requirement Met)
External Examiners attend an induction with the University and this covers everything they
need to know in order to undertake their role effectively. External Examiners for this
programme are required to have had wide-ranging experience in teaching and assessing
hygiene and therapy students. They will scrutinise the marking of all summative, written
assessments undertaken as part of the programme and will report on the quality of the marking
16

in general as well as the feedback given to students by internal examiners. In discussions with
senior staff, they may suggest alterations to examination questions and/or marking guides if
necessary.
The External Examiners attend and observe the finals case discussion examination. They are
not involved in the questioning of students and provide a quality assurance function only. They
will also be present at examination board meetings where they can give direct feedback about
the assessments they have scrutinised and the practical assessments they have observed.
Any changes to modules are discussed with the external examiners for their input and advice.
It was clear to the inspection team that the school values the experience and advice the
external examiners bring to the programme.
Each External Examiner submits a full report at the end of each academic year and these will
inform any action plans, set up through module reviews, for the following academic year as
appropriate.
The inspectors had the opportunity to meet the External Examiners as part of the inspection
process and were pleased to hear that they felt this programme offers an educational
experience comparable to other similar programmes offered across the UK. They told the
panel that they had been given plenty of time to look at the required paperwork and were
provided with high quality guidance from both the school and the university. The External
Examiners felt that the school are very open to the suggestions and comments they make as
part of their role. They felt their views are listened to and taken on board where possible.
Requirement 21: Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear criteria. The
standard expected of students in each area to be assessed must be clear and students
and staff involved in assessment must be aware of this standard. An appropriate
standard setting process must be employed for summative assessments. (Requirement
Met)
Staff told us that they have the impression that, by the time students reach the final year, they
understand how the different elements of the programme come together. Along the way, they
might not necessarily grasp why they are learning a particular subject or topic until they see the
bigger picture.
Students stated that they were given clear information at the start of each academic year about
what they were expected to achieve and that module descriptors provided clearly set out the
learning outcomes they are intending to meet. Module handbooks set out the expected
learning outcomes and the level of achievement required. Assessments are explained to
students during the introduction to each module and during revision sessions prior to
examinations.
External Examiners told the inspectors that there have been major changes to assessments,
including the introduction of more robust procedures and clearer guidance, which have vastly
improved the programme. They felt that the case presentation examination which forms part of
the finals was, perhaps, too short to allow students to fairly demonstrate their depth of
knowledge. They felt it would be fairer to extend the length of case presentations. The
inspectors would support the school giving further consideration to this.
Actions
No
13, 15

Actions for the Provider
The school must ensure that patient access is improved to
ensure that clinical outcomes are being achieved. Consideration

Due date

17

21

must be given to extending outreach provision to accomplish
this.
The school should consider extending the length of case
presentations to allow students to better demonstrate their depth
of knowledge.

18

Summary of Actions
Req.
Action
number

Observations

Due date

Response from Provider
1.1

5

The peer review system should continue to be rolled
out to all clinical locations, including outreach.

Peer review of teaching in all clinical and nonclinical teaching environments within the Dental
Hospital, is embedded into the School of Dental
Hygiene and Therapy’s quality assurance
process.

Peer review of
teaching will be
rolled out to all
clinical locations
by July 2017

The outreach placement visit procedure and
documentation was reviewed and revised in
October 2016. The number of tutors assigned to
undertake these visits during 2016-2017 has been
rationalised and reduced in order to improve
standardisation.
The outreach placement visits during 2016-17 will
be timetabled to include time for peer observation
of clinical teaching to take place. The peer review
process will use the standardised format utilised in
the Dental Hospital, enabling the tutor under
review to request feedback on specific areas of
their teaching practice prior to the visits.
Discussion and feedback after the session with
the reviewer will facilitate planning for
improvements and identify any further support
needs.

19

Outreach tutors have also been invited to attend
the Dental Hospital to offer similar peer review
opportunities to the tutors in the BSDHT.
1.2

10, 12

12

The school should consider a scheme to allow
outreach tutors to visit one another’s clinics in order to
improve the standardisation of experience and should
look at other means of calibration.

Please see comments at ‘5’ above.

The school should investigate the possibility of
extending the outreach scheme.

The outreach clinic at Good Hope Hospital reopened in November 2016, providing students with
wider outreach experience.

In addition, this will be discussed with outreach
tutors at the next Outreach tutors Seminar meeting
on 28th March 2017. Tutors will be encouraged to
visit the BSDHT to undertake peer review and
standardisation exercises with us and also to visit
their colleagues in other outreach clinics.

Discussions are ongoing within this Trust and a
neighbouring Trust as to the possibility of providing
further outreach opportunities on School mobile
dental units in the area.

An update to be
provided in the
annual monitoring
exercise 2017

An update to be
provided in the
annual monitoring
exercise 2017

We are exploring the possibilities of utilising
outreach opportunities in primary care facilities in
General Dental Practice.
1.3

13, 15

The school must ensure that patient access is
improved to ensure that clinical outcomes are being
achieved. Consideration must be given to extending
outreach provision to accomplish this.

Please see comments in ‘12’ above.
Within the Dental Hospital, from September 2016
we instigated regular weekly screening sessions
on our paediatric clinic, to plan treatment for
children who are referred for consultant care but
who are found to be suitable to receive care from
undergraduate students. This continues to

An update to be
provided in the
annual monitoring
exercise 2017

20

bolster our supply of paediatric patients requiring
restorative care.
Local General Dental Practitioners (GDPs) have
been encouraged to refer paediatric patients to
undergraduate students for treatment, if they
wish. This initiative was launched across the
combined Dental Services in the West Midlands,
in July 2016 and referral forms were issued to all
GDPs in the area. Referrals can be sent to the
Birmingham Dental Hospital or to outreach
placement clinics in the community, near to the
patient’s home. These patients may be treated
by BDS students and/or by BSDHT students.
Since September 2016 we have established
fortnightly adult screening clinics in the timetable,
within the BSDHT. Senior DHT students assist
BSDHT dentists in assessing patients who have
volunteered for care with students. This is
providing a very good source of new patients for
the students to treat, whilst also giving the
students the opportunity to improve their
treatment planning skills.
Recall patients from the BDS list are shared with
students in the School DHT and provide very
useful clinical experience for junior students.
1.4

21

The school should consider extending the length of
case presentations to allow students to better
demonstrate their depth of knowledge.

With the support of our external examiners and
examination board, the length of the SHoCSA
case discussion part of the Finals assessments,
will be increased from 10 to 15 minutes for the
exams taking place in June 2017. This will allow
students more time to settle into the discussions,

The discussions
will be lengthened
in June 2017 and
reviewed as part
of our quality

21

whilst maintaining the standardisation of
assessment which we strive to achieve. This
change will be reviewed subsequently with the
help of our external examiners in their quality
assurance role.
Further increases in time
allocation may be considered in future if we feel
that this will improve the quality of the
assessment and allow students more opportunity
to demonstrate their achievement of the required
GDC outcomes for this assessment.

assurance
process.

Observations from the provider on content of report
The Birmingham School of Dental Hygiene and Therapy thank the GDC Inspectors for their careful consideration of the BSc Programme
and for giving us a comprehensive report on our progress in meeting the GDC Standards for Education. This has enabled us to gain focus
on areas where we can continue to improve the educational experience for our students.

Recommendations to the GDC
The inspectors recommend that this qualification continues to be approved for holders to apply for registration as a dental hygienist/dental
therapist with the General Dental Council.
The School must provide detailed information regarding how they have met, or are endeavouring to meet, the required actions set down in this
report.
22

Annex 1
Inspection purpose and process
1.

As part of its duty to protect patients and promote high standards within the professions it regulates, the General Dental Council (GDC)
quality assures the education and training of student dentists and dental care professionals (DCPs) at institutions whose qualifications
enable the holder to apply for registration with the GDC. It also quality assures new qualifications where it is intended that the qualification
will lead to registration. The aim of this quality assurance activity is to ensure that institutions produce a new registrant who has
demonstrated, on graduation, that they have met the learning outcomes required for registration with the GDC. This ensures that students
who obtain a qualification leading to registration are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner.

2.

Inspections are a key element of the GDC’s quality assurance activity. They enable a recommendation to be made to the Council of the
GDC regarding the ‘sufficiency’ of the programme for registration as a dentist and ‘approval’ of the programme for registration as a dental
care professional. The GDC’s powers are derived under Part II, Section 9 of the Dentists Act 1984 (as amended).

3.

The GDC document ‘Standards for Education’ 2nd edition1 is the framework used to evaluate qualifications. There are 21 Requirements in
three distinct Standards, against which each qualification is assessed.

4.

The education provider is requested to undertake a self-evaluation of the programme against the individual Requirements under the
Standards for Education. This involves stating whether each Requirement is ‘met’, ‘partly met’ or ‘not met’ and to provide evidence in
support of their evaluation. The inspection panel examines this evidence, may request further documentary evidence and gathers further
evidence from discussions with staff and students. The panel will reach a decision on each Requirement, using the following descriptors:

A Requirement is met if:
“There is sufficient appropriate evidence derived from the inspection process. This evidence provides the inspectors with broad confidence
that the provider demonstrates the Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students is supportive of documentary
evidence and the evidence is robust, consistent and not contradictory. There may be minor deficiencies in the evidence supplied but these are
likely to be inconsequential.”
A Requirement is partly met if:
1

http://www.gdc-uk.org/Aboutus/education/Documents/Standards%20for%20Education.pdf

23

“Evidence derived from the inspection process is either incomplete or lacks detail and, as such, fails to convince the inspection panel that the
provider fully demonstrates the Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students may not fully support the
evidence submitted or there may be contradictory information in the evidence provided. There is, however, some evidence of compliance and
it is likely that either (a) the appropriate evidence can be supplied in a short time frame, or, (b) any deficiencies identified can be addressed
and evidenced in the annual monitoring process.”
A Requirement is not met if
“The provider cannot provide evidence to demonstrate a Requirement or the evidence provided is not convincing. The information gathered at
the inspection through meetings with staff and students does not support the evidence provided or the evidence is inconsistent and/or
incompatible with other findings. The deficiencies identified are such as to give rise to serious concern and will require an immediate action
plan from the provider. The consequences of not meeting a Requirement in terms of the overall sufficiency of a programme will depend upon
the compliance of the provider across the range of Requirements and the possible implications for public protection”
5.

Inspection reports highlight areas of strength and draw attention to areas requiring improvement and development, including actions that
are required to be undertaken by the provider. Where an action is needed for a Requirement to be met, the term ‘must’ is used to describe
the obligation on the provider to undertake this action. For these actions the inspectors may stipulate a specific timescale by which the
action must be completed or when an update on progress must be provided. In their observations on the content of the report, the provider
should confirm the anticipated date by which these actions will be completed. Where an action would improve how a Requirement is met,
the term ‘should’ is used and for these actions there will be no due date stipulated. Providers will be asked to report on the progress in
addressing the required actions through the annual monitoring process. Serious concerns about a lack of progress may result in further
inspections or other quality assurance activity.

6.

The QA team aims to send an initial draft of the inspection report to the provider within two months of the conclusion of the inspection. The
provider of the qualification has the opportunity to provide factual corrections on the draft report. Following the production of the final report
the provider is asked to submit observations on, or objections to, the report and the actions listed. Where the inspection panel have
recommended that the programme is sufficient for registration, the Council of the GDC have delegated responsibility to the GDC Registrar
to consider the recommendations of the panel. Should an inspection panel not be able to recommend ‘sufficiency’ or ‘approval’, the report
and observations would be presented to the Council of the GDC for consideration.

7.

The final version of the report and the provider’s observations are published on the GDC website.

24

25

