INSPECTION REPORT
Education provider:

King’s College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust

Programme/Award:

Diploma in Dental Hygiene and Therapy

Remit and purpose:

Full inspection referencing the Standards for
Education to determine continuing approval of
the award for the purpose of registration with the
GDC as a dental hygienist and therapist

Learning Outcomes:

Preparing for Practice (Dental Hygiene and
Therapy)

Programme inspection dates:

23 to 24 February 2016

Examination inspection
dates:

14 to 16 June 2016

Inspection panel:

Philip Bunnell (Chair and Lay Member)
Christine Cotton (Dental Care Professional
Member)
Isobel Madden (Dentist Member)

GDC Staff:

Kathryn Counsell-Hubbard

Previous inspection:

18 to 19 January 2007

Outcome:

Recommended that the King’s College Hospital
NHS Foundation Trust Diploma in Dental
Hygiene and Therapy programme remains
approved for registration as dental hygienists
and therapists

1

Inspection summary
The Diploma in Dental Hygiene and Therapy programme delivered at King’s College
Hospital is funded by the King’s College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust (hereafter referred
to as the ‘Trust’) with final examinations being provided by the Royal College of Surgeons of
England (hereafter referred to as ‘RCSEng’). The qualification is awarded by RCSEng
following successful completion of its examinations at the end of 2.5 years of full-time study.
The content and delivery of the programme is well-organised and clearly-structured by a
dedicated course team, with students being able to visit a range of Trust clinics as part of
their outreach training. The course team work closely with one another and are able to share
information, including that relating to student performance and clinical incidents, quickly and
easily.
The inspectors identified three key challenges for the programme that require action: lack of
investment from the Trust in terms of information technology (IT) and administrative staff to
support the students and course team respectively; limited integration with the
undergraduate dentistry programme delivered by King’s College London (KCL) in terms of
mixed theoretical and clinical teaching of students from both programmes; and a lack of
formalisation of processes and recording (formalisation is addressed in the main body of this
report).
The panel recognised that Trust investment and student dental care professional and
student dentist integration are issues that the course team cannot solve alone, but are still
important issues that must be highlighted. Improved IT and administrative support would
allow for better monitoring of students and allow the course team to allocate more time to the
analysis of student data, without spending unnecessary time inputting data and undertaking
non-clinical audit tasks, such as identifying student non-attendance. Without student
integration, the exposure DCP students have to working as a part of a team is limited
because they have a very short amount of time with dental students. The dentistry and
dental hygiene and therapy programmes are delivered by different providers, one being the
Trust and the other being KCL. The hygiene and therapy students could benefit from an
increased range of clinical settings should they be able to mix with dental students more
regularly and the sharing of facilities, including the clinical skills facility and lecture rooms,
would improve the teaching environment for hygiene and therapy students. Some pressure
on the course team, which is part-time, would be alleviated if some theoretical teaching of
the two student groups were combined. Both are issues that the panel agree should be
considered and discussed by the relevant authorities.
The panel wishes to thank staff and students for their participation with and hospitality during
the inspection.

2

Background and overview of Qualification
Annual intake
Programme duration
Format of programme

30 students
2.5 years full-time
Year 1:
Modules:
▪ Anatomy
▪ Physiology
▪ Histology
▪ Microbiology
▪ Human disease
▪ Pharmacology
▪ Periodontology
▪ Embryology and Dental Histology
▪ Intro to Law and Ethics Standards for the Dental
Team
▪ Oral Health Education (OHE) – oral hygiene, diet
advice, fluoride advice, smoking and alcohol
advice
▪ Pain management module, including anxiety and
Local Analgesia
▪ Introduction to clinic module, including history
taking, patient assessment, cross infection control,
medical emergencies and Basic Life Support (BLS)
▪ Communication module
▪ Law and Ethics – dental record keeping,
confidentiality, consent
▪ Clinical Hygiene Skills Course (CHSC)
▪ Adult Restorative Skills course (ARSC)
Assessments:
▪ End of Term 1 written examination
▪ CHSC written and practical assessment
(June/July) - summative
▪ Introduction to Clinic Examination (July) summative
▪ End of Year 1 written mock examination
(September)
▪ End of Year 1 written examination (October) summative
▪ End of Year 1 OSCE (November) - summative
Assignments:
▪ Practice placement and completion of practice
placement booklet
Year 2:
Modules:
▪ Completion of ARSC
▪ Child Restorative Skills Course (CRSC)
▪ Periodontology
▪ Law and Ethics – team working, complaints
handling, clinical and information governance
▪ Reflective Practice module
3

▪
▪
▪
▪

Dental Public Health module
Acute conditions and Oral Medicine module
Radiology module
Pain management – conscious sedation and
general anaesthetic
▪ Implants
▪ Smoking cessation level 2
▪ Medical emergencies and BLS refresher
Assessments:
▪ ARSC written and practical assessment (January)
– summative
▪ CRSC written and practical assessment (March) –
summative
▪ Hygiene In-course Assessment (March) –
formative
▪ Therapy In-course assessment (June/July) –
formative
▪ Radiology Examination (September) – summative
Assignments:
▪ Communications portfolio – summative
▪ Law and Ethics portfolio – summative
▪ Acute conditions case studies (May)
▪ OHE hygiene case study (June)
▪ Reflective Practice portfolio (June)
▪ Dental Public Health activities and posters
▪ Project – submission November & presentations
December
▪ Oral medicine case studies (November)
▪ OHE case study – Adult Therapy (December)
Year 3:
Modules:
▪ Periodontology
▪ Medical emergencies and BLS refresher
Assessments:
▪ Mock Finals written – March
▪ Mock Finals Case presentations – March
▪ Written Finals (May) – summative
▪ Finals Case Presentations (June) – summative
Assignments:
▪ Developmental disorders presentations (January)
▪ OHE case study for Child Therapy – (March)
Number of providers
delivering the programme

1 provider delivering the programme, 1 provider delivering
the final exams and awarding the qualification

4

The Inspection
Standard 1 – Protecting patients
Providers must be aware of their duty to protect the public. Providers must ensure that
patient safety is paramount and care of patients is of an appropriate standard. Any risk
to the safety of patients and their care by students must be minimised
Requirements
Met
Partly Not
met
met
1. Students must provide patient care only when they have
demonstrated adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical
✓
procedures, the student should be assessed as competent in
the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients
2. Providers must have systems in place to inform patients that
they may be treated by students and the possible implications
of this. Patient agreement to treatment by a student must be
obtained and recorded prior to treatment commencing.

✓

3. Students must only provide patient care in an environment
which is safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with
relevant legislation and requirements regarding patient care,
including equality and diversity, wherever treatment takes
place.

✓

4. When providing patient care and services, providers must
ensure that students are supervised appropriately according to
the activity and the student’s stage of development.

✓

5. Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained.
This should include training in equality and diversity
legislation relevant for the role. Clinical supervisors must
have appropriate general or specialist registration with a
UK regulatory body.

✓

6. Providers must ensure that students and all those involved in
the delivery of education and training are aware of their
obligation to raise concerns if they identify any risks to patient
safety and the need for candour when things go wrong.
Providers should publish policies so that it is clear to all
parities how concerns will be raised and how these concerns
will be acted upon. Providers must support those who do raise
concerns and provide assurance that staff and students will
not be penalised for doing so.

✓

7. Systems must be in place to identify and record issues that may
affect patient safety. Should a patient safety issue arise,
appropriate action must be taken by the provider and where
necessary the relevant regulatory body should be notified.
8. Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and
apply as required. The content and significance of the student
fitness to practise procedures must be conveyed to students

✓

✓

5

and aligned to GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance.
Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be
familiar with the GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance.
Providers must also ensure that the GDC’s Standards for the
Dental Team are embedded within student training.

Requirement 1: Students must provide patient care only when they have demonstrated
adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical procedures, the student should be
assessed as competent in the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients (Requirement Met)
The programme includes three comprehensive clinical modules which are supported by a
range of assessments: Clinical Hygiene Skills Course (CHSC), Adult Restorative Skills Course
(ARSC) and Child Restorative Skills Course (CRSC). CHSC commences prior to a written
examination on medical emergencies, law and ethics, cross infection and patient assessment
which determines progression onto clinic. An Introduction to the Clinical Environment course
and the Communications Module further support the transition into the clinical environment.
Once on clinic students complete evaluation booklets on each of the skill sets taught in the
clinical modules and are subject to supervisor feedback and formative assessment while
treating patients. An Objective Structured Clinical Examination (OSCE) must be passed at the
end of Year One to allow students to progress to future years.
The panel were satisfied that students are adequately trained and assessed prior to treating
patients.
Requirement 2: Providers must have systems in place to inform patients that they may
be treated by students and the possible implications of this. Patient agreement to
treatment by a student must be obtained and recorded prior to treatment commencing.
(Requirement Met)
The panel found the explanatory documents for patients and the consent forms used to be
examples of good practice. The patient-focused leaflet on treatment by student hygienists
and therapists was comprehensive. The consent forms were highly detailed and new
declarations had to be signed at different stages of treatment. These practices are supported
by the use of identity badges that inform patients that their hygienist/therapist is a student
and the students informed the panel that they always introduce themselves to patients as
students.
Requirement 3: Students must only provide patient care in an environment which is
safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with relevant legislation and
requirements regarding patient care, including equality and diversity, wherever
treatment takes place (Requirement Partly Met)
Students practise at clinics at King’s College Hospital which are subject to Trust policies. A
full governance framework is in operation with the programme leads attending meetings
where issues are highlighted by the clinical incident reporting system Datix. The Datix
system is capable of highlighting clinical incidents involving hygiene/therapy students but
none have arisen.
All outreach placements are based within Trust facilities and are subject to the same
governance framework. Programme leads are not involved in the governance of those
6

placements but are informed of any relevant issues by the Clinical Director for King’s
College Hospital.
Equality and diversity training is mandatory for all programme staff who hold contracts with
the Trust. Evidence of completion of this training was available to the panel.
While programme staff have been involved with audits of the clinical areas, they do not
have ownership of this process. They therefore plan to complete their own audits in future
to ensure the clinical areas are suitable for their students’ needs. These plans are
approximately six months from implementation, and once implemented the panel would
consider this requirement to be fully met. At present, the programme leads are not assured
that the clinical areas are appropriate for student treatment and learning. While Trust
processes provide a great deal of confidence, additional action by the programme leads
would give greater assurance.
Requirement 4: When providing patient care and services, providers must ensure that
students are supervised appropriately according to the activity and the student’s stage
of development (Requirement Partly Met)
The panel were impressed with supervision guidance utilised on the programme. This gives
clear descriptors of how student performance should progress at each stage during the
programme and the requisite level of supervision required. This guidance is underpinned by a
consistent 1:5 supervisor to student ratio which is often 2:5 depending on teaching
responsibilities. As all programme staff are part-time, achieving these levels of supervision is
to be commended.
Comprehensive module guides for the clinical elements are made available to all staff,
including those based in outreach placements. All staff are made aware through their induction
onto the programme, and in staff meetings, when these modules are taught and therefore are
aware of the skills students should be competent at and when.
The panel were informed of an incident that occurred when a student was left unsupervised
with a patient on placement, and was later accused of theft. While the student was cleared of
any misconduct, the incident posed a significant concern to the panel about the importance for
supervision to be maintained at all times.
To fully meet the requirement, the programme leads must investigate supervision levels at the
outreach placements and ensure that they are consistently applied in line with their guidelines.
If appropriate, additional training should be provided to outreach supervisors to further inform
and highlight the risks to students of inconsistent supervision. If possible, the programme
leads should liaise with the Trust to seek provision of additional dental nurses to work with
students on outreach which would form an additional supervisory layer.
Requirement 5: Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained. This should
include training in equality and diversity legislation relevant for the role. Clinical
supervisors must have appropriate general or specialist registration with a UK
regulatory body (Requirement Partly Met)
All supervisors hold appropriate registration with the GDC, which was checked by GDC staff,
and have undergone both a Trust and School-level induction. When joining the programme,
new staff undertake a year-long ‘settling down’ period whereby they shadow other staff and
learn about the modules, gradually taking over particular areas of work. New staff do not
automatically fulfil all areas of their role, such as signing off student competency booklets or
supervising students without another member of staff present. These duties will only be
7

allowed once the programme leads are satisfied with the new staff member’s progression,
which is measured by reviews every three months.
The Trust induction is a corporate event while the School induction is specific to the
programme. As the outreach placements are Trust clinics, supervisory staff there also undergo
the corporate induction. Similarly, all staff fulfil Trust equality and diversity training
requirements. Programme-specific training is offered to outreach supervisors but the ability to
deliver this is affected by time constraints.
The training of outreach supervisors is an issue with which the panel were not satisfied. The
panel understood that role-specific training would be difficult to implement given the part-time
working arrangements and teaching responsibilities of programme staff, but agreed that
additional measures must be introduced. Formalising the School induction into a learning
package and sharing this with outreach staff, or holding short training events with the
programme leads visiting outreach, could both be ways in which such training could be
achieved.
Requirement 6: Providers must ensure that students and all those involved in the
delivery of education and training are aware of their obligation to raise concerns if they
identify any risks to patient safety and the need for candour when things go wrong.
Providers should publish policies so that it is clear to all parties how concerns should
be raised and how these concerns will be acted upon. Providers must support those
who do raise concerns and provide assurance that staff and students will not be
penalised for doing so. (Requirement Met)
The panel found that the area of raising concerns, and particularly the professionals’ duty of
candour, was taught to a high standard. The need for candour is explained fully in a lecture
and the supporting guidance is contained within the student handbook.
Staff meetings give an opportunity for issues to be shared and discussed. Tutorials have also
been implemented before each clinic which allow for clinical issues to be discussed as a
group and for concerns to be raised and discussed.
The panel met with three groups of students and all exhibited a solid understanding of their
responsibilities and expressed confidence that they would raise a concern if necessary. One
student disclosed that they were instructed by a clinician to perform a procedure which was
outside of their scope of practice. The student informed the clinician that they were unable to
do this, which demonstrated exceptional confidence and professionalism to the panel.
Requirement 7: Systems must be in place to identify and record issues that may affect
patient safety. Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be taken by
the provider and where necessary the relevant regulatory body should be notified.
(Requirement Partly Met)
Datix is the primary instrument used to record clinical issues and incidents. Students and
supervisors must inform the head dental nurse for each department of any incidents. The head
nurse is responsible for logging this in the Datix system. The need to report incidents to the
head nurse is contained within the duty of candour guidance. Examples of an adverse incident
log were provided to the panel.
As the Datix system and the associated processes are not owned by the programme leads, it
was not clear how quickly an incident would be identified and whether the programme leads
would be the individuals responsible for informing a regulatory body. The panel understand
that the programme leads must collaborate with the established Trust systems, however, some
programme-specific recording, such as notes from governance meetings or records of
8

investigations by the programme leads or other staff must be introduced. Additional recording
that demonstrates a cyclical process from identification of an incident to its resolution and
subsequent learning is required to fully meet this requirement.
Requirement 8: Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and apply as
required. The content and significance of the student fitness to practise procedures
must be conveyed to students and aligned to GDC Student Fitness to Practise
Guidance. Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar with the
GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance. Providers must also ensure that the GDC’s
Standard for the Dental Team are embedded within student training (Requirement Met)
Sufficient student fitness to practise policies are in place and these are supported by preclinical teaching. Issues may be identified via supervision of, and discussion with, students and
any such issues are discussed at staff plenary meetings. Either personal tutors or programme
leads will meet with students to address and attempt to resolve the issue, but any persistent
failure in a student’s fitness to practise will be referred to either the Clinical Progress
Committee or the Academic Progress Committee.
Evidence was provided of identification of fitness to practise issues and learning plans with
additional supervision requirements have been implemented. The students were aware of the
GDC’s Standards for the Dental Team and these are incorporated into the pre-clinical
teaching. Professionalism was well understood by the students who met with the inspectors,
who had no concerns about this area of the programme.
Actions
No
Actions for the Provider
3
Programme leads must implement plans for clinical audits or a
similar plan to ensure that clinical areas are safe for students.
4

Programme leads must ensure that supervision levels are
consistent at outreach placements at all times.

5

Programme leads must extend supervisor training to outreach
supervisors.

7

Process must be implemented that demonstrates that
programme staff and leads identify, resolve, and learn from
clinical incidents.

Due date
Annual
Monitoring
2017/18
Annual
Monitoring
2017/18
Annual
Monitoring
2017/18
Annual
Monitoring
2017/18

9

Standard 2 – Quality evaluation and review of the programme
The provider must have in place effective policy and procedures for the monitoring and
review of the programme
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
9. The provider must have a framework in place that details how
✓
it manages the quality of the programme which includes
making appropriate changes to ensure the curriculum
continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and
adapts to changing legislation and external guidance. There
must be a clear statement about where responsibility lies for
this function.
10. Any concerns identified through the Quality Management
framework, including internal and external reports relating to
quality, must be addressed as soon as possible and the GDC
notified of serious threats to students achieving the learning
outcomes.
11. Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external
quality assurance procedures. External quality assurance
should include the use of external examiners, who should be
familiar with the GDC learning outcomes and their context
and QAA guidelines should be followed where applicable.
Patient and/or customer feedback must be collected and
used to inform programme development.
12. The provider must have effective systems in place to quality
assure placements where students deliver treatment to
ensure that patient care and student assessment across all
locations meets these Standards. The quality assurance
systems should include the regular collection of student and
patient feedback relating to placements.

✓

✓

✓

GDC comments
Requirement 9: The provider must have a framework in place that details how it
manages the quality of the programme which includes making appropriate changes to
ensure the curriculum continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and adapts
to changing legislation and external guidance. There must be a clear statement about
where responsibility lies for this function (Requirement Partly Met)
The present quality management framework is largely based on informal agreements and
procedures. The framework itself consists of a series of meetings between programme leads
and staff to discuss elements of the programme. Weekly plenary meetings deal with the weekto-week running of the programme and any issues concerning students, while modules are
reviewed each year. Staff meetings are held to discuss feedback received from students and
what changes to the programme this feedback may require.
While the majority of these meetings appear to be minuted or recorded in some way, there are
no ‘living’ documents that ensure items identified for action at one meeting are picked up at the
next meeting or to ensure that the outcome of any changes are recorded and monitored.
Recording is a weak point of the programme and this was disclosed to the panel by the
10

programme leads. Administrative and IT support to help facilitate formal recording has not
been available for the programme.
The programme leads stated that the learning outcomes are reviewed each year but no
evidence of this was provided during the inspection. Changes to the programme year-on-year
are not recorded, so it was not possible for the panel to be assured that the quality of the
programme has been managed effectively. The commitment of the programme leads to
ensuring that the programme is of a high quality was evident but this commitment was
seriously undermined by gaps in the recording process.
As identified by the programme leads in their pre-inspection documents, quality management
must be formalised. The implementation of overarching recording documents that demonstrate
what changes have been made to the programme and why, as well as formal mapping of the
coverage of the learning outcomes, would assist in meeting this requirement. The inspectors
agreed that the Trust should be informed of the inspection findings and the possibility of
additional support explored. Increased administrative and IT support would allow for some of
the required recording to be undertaken by someone other than the programme leads who are
extremely time limited.
Requirement 10: Any concerns identified through the Quality Management framework,
including internal and external reports relating to quality, must be addressed as soon
as possible and the GDC notified of serious threats to students achieving the learning
outcomes. (Requirement Partly Met)
Weakness in recording also applies to this requirement as there is no evidence that external
reports on quality, such as those from external examiners, are formally discussed and acted
on. There are no set timeframes within which reports must be considered, and the programme
leads do not formally respond to such reports.
As all clinical teaching and experience is gained across a wide range of Trust clinics, there is
only a limited risk that students will not gain the requisite amount of clinical experience.
However, as the programme leads undertake so many of the tasks required in terms of
organising the programme, teaching, assessing, and reviewing the programme, a significant
risk would be realised if one of the leads were unexpectedly absent. While the panel were
confident that there is effective communication between all members of staff, without effective
recording to fall back on, the notion of a programme lead being away for a period of time is
one that would have a significant effect on the student’s ability to achieve the leaning
outcomes, particularly as all members of staff teach.
Prior to the inspection, the programme leads informed the GDC of a serious threat regarding
their examining body. This gives the panel confidence that any other issues would be similarly
disclosed. However, this does not negate the need for more effective recording and for
consideration to be given to a contingency plan to mitigate the risk should a key staff member
be unexpectedly absent.
Requirement 11: Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external quality
assurance procedures. External quality assurance should include the use of external
examiners, who should be familiar with the GDC learning outcomes and their context
and QAA guidelines should be followed where applicable. Patient and/or customer
feedback must be collected and used to inform programme development. (Requirement
Partly Met)
The programme is subject to two main forms of external reporting: external examiner reports
and an Annual Performance Review completed by the Local Education and Training Board
(LETB). The Annual Performance Review is based on a self-assessment by the programme
11

leads and includes a review of a variety of areas including recruitment, academic performance
and transparency. In addition to the LETB report, the programme must participate in audits
imposed by the Trust that add an additional layer of scrutiny external to the programme team.
External examiner reports are provided twice during the programme: after the Year One
OSCEs and written papers and after the final RCSEng examinations. The presiding external
examiner, used for the Year One OSCEs, is recruited by the School and provides direct
feedback on the content of the OSCEs and written papers and makes recommendations for
future exams. The examiners used for the final RCSEng case presentations are recruited and
trained by the Royal College.
Feedback is an important area for the programme leads and this is currently collected from
patients after each appointment at King’s College Hospital and at one of the outreach
placements. However, how this feedback is formally considered and used to develop the
programme was not clear. The collection of feedback is not underpinned by a policy that
describes who will consider this and when and how it will be discussed. Devising a policy will
help the programme to fully meet this requirement.
The programme leads told the panel that they plan to begin collecting of employer feedback to
monitor the performance of graduated students. The panel were supportive of this initiative
and hope that this is implemented later in 2016.
Requirement 12: The provider must have effective systems in place to quality assure
placements where students deliver treatment to ensure that patient care and student
assessment across all locations meets these Standards. (Requirement Partly Met)
The School is aware of its need to develop quality assurance processes for outreach
placements. There is heavy reliance on the existing Trust governance procedures with little
consideration of the particular need of students. The programme leads are in contact with the
Community Dental Officer in charge of the community clinics, although the level of this contact
was not clear from meetings with programme leads. A member of staff at one of the outreach
placements is also a tutor on the programme so there is an opportunity for regular updates
about student experience at this site. This feedback is not recorded.
Student feedback in regards to placements is formally collected in an end of course
evaluation. The students are not visited while at outreach and a serious issue had already
occurred (discussed under Requirement 4). Students did not disclose any difficulties at
outreach when they met with the panel.
The programme leads must introduce a method to quality assure outreach placements.
Regular contact should be maintained with students to ensure that any difficulties on
placement are disclosed. Ideally all placements should be visited at least once a year when
students are at the placement.
Actions
No
9

9 & 10

Actions for the Provider
The findings of the inspection report must be shared with the
Trust. Options for additional support must be formally explored
between the Trust and the programme leads.
Formalisation of the quality management of the programme and
increased recording must be implemented.

Due date
Annual
Monitoring
2017/18
Annual
Monitoring
2017/18

12

10

A contingency plan to counter unexpected staff absence must
be discussed and defined in writing.

11

Policy regarding the use of patient feedback must be introduced
to ensure that this information is formally considered and used
to develop the programme.
Quality assurance measures for outreach placements must be
introduced. Patient feedback methods must be rolled out across
all sites.

12

Annual
Monitoring
2017/18
Annual
Monitoring
2017/18
Annual
Monitoring
2017/18

13

Standard 3– Student assessment
Assessment must be reliable and valid. The choice of assessment method must be
appropriate to demonstrate achievement of the GDC learning outcomes. Assessors
must be fit to perform the assessment task
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
13. To award the qualification, providers must be assured that
students have demonstrated attainment across the full range
✓
of learning outcomes, and that they are fit to practise at the
level of a safe beginner. Evidence must be provided that
demonstrates this assurance, which should be supported by
a coherent approach to the principles of assessment referred
to in these standards.
14. The provider must have in place management systems to
plan, monitor and centrally record the assessment of
students, including the monitoring of clinical and/or technical
experience, throughout the programme against each of the
learning outcomes
15. Students must have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients and procedures and should undertake each activity
relating to patient care on sufficient occasions to enable them
to develop the skills and the level of competency to achieve
the relevant learning outcomes

✓

✓

16. Providers must demonstrate that assessments are fit for
purpose and deliver results which are valid and reliable. The
methods of assessment used must be appropriate to the
learning outcomes, in line with current and best practice and
be routinely monitored, quality assured and developed.

✓

17. Assessment must utilise feedback collected from a variety of
sources, which should include other members of the dental
team, peers, patients and/or customers.
18. The provider must support students to improve their
performance by providing regular feedback and by
encouraging students to reflect on their practice.

✓

✓

19. Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills,
experience and training to undertake the task of assessment,
including appropriate general or specialist registration with a
UK regulatory body. Examiners/ assessors should have
received training in equality and diversity relevant for their
role.

✓

20. Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent
to which assessment processes are rigorous, set at the
correct standard, ensure equity of treatment for students and
have been fairly conducted. The responsibilities of the
external examiners must be clearly documented.

✓

21. Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear
criteria. The standard expected of students in each area

✓

14

to be assessed must be clear and students and staff
involved in assessment must be aware of this standard.
An appropriate standard setting process must be
employed for summative assessments.
GDC comments
Requirement 13: To award the qualification, providers must be assured that students
have demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes, and that they
are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner. Evidence must be provided that
demonstrates this assurance, which should be supported by a coherent approach to the
principles of assessment referred to in these standards. (Requirement Met)
Assurance regarding student attainment comes from two main sources: weekly team meetings
to discuss student progression and review of log sheets. The latter are submitted to the school
for collation so that an overview of each students’ clinical experience can be achieved.
Programme assessments have been mapped against learning outcomes so achievement of
the range of outcomes can be tracked. The sign-up process for the internal final examinations
is defined in policy and includes requirements for attendance, attainment and formative
performance.
The panel found areas of concern within the overall framework for assuring student attainment,
notably the fact that student data is collated irregularly (discussed in further detail under
Requirement 14). The mapping of the assessments to learning outcomes appeared to have
been completed recently and was not found to be a process that embedded in the programme.
Furthermore, this mapping did not extend to the programme timetable, so the entire process of
what is assessed, when and how, is not defined. Implementation of more stringent and allencompassing mapping would have assisted the panel and would be of benefit to the
programme leads in ensuring that future assessments continue to deliver appropriately trained
students at each stage of the programme.
The programme leads explained which students were not progressing and why. The panel
queried why some students had progressed, as the logbooks demonstrated gaps in
competence. The programme leads gave assurances that there is supporting documentation
that is consulted to ascertain whether gaps in the logbooks are legitimate reasons for holding a
student back. The panel agreed that some additional recording in such instances should be
introduced to ensure there is an appropriate audit trail.
The programme’s sign-up process is a precursor to the official sign-up completed by the
RCSEng, who administer the final examinations. The final examinations consist of two written
papers and two case presentations, one being for dental hygiene and the other for dental
therapy. The RCSEng sign-up requirements were provided to the panel. The panel were
satisfied that only those students with the necessary knowledge and attainment to date were
allowed to sit the final examinations.
The panel found this requirement to be met overall, but would strongly recommend that
additional recording of progression decisions is introduced. An increased level of mapping that
includes guidance about when and how each learning outcome is assessed, and is used as a
‘living’ document that is updated regularly, should also be introduced.
Requirement 14: The provider must have in place management systems to plan, monitor
and centrally record the assessment of students, including the monitoring of clinical
and/or technical experience, throughout the programme against each of the learning
outcomes (Requirement Partly Met)
15

Student attainment is recorded both for clinical experience and for achievement in formal
assessments. While the amount of clinical experience and results in assessments are
considered together, this is not reconciled with the learning outcomes so there is no
overarching document the programme leads can consult to check if students are meeting all of
the learning outcomes.
A significant issue is that clinical experience data is only collated twice a term. The lack of
administrative support means that the programmes leads must input the numbers from log
sheets themselves and this task is often relegated in the face of other duties, such as teaching
and supervising students. The panel was of the opinion that such a task could be completed by
non-clinical personnel which would allow for more regular collation, and therefore more regular
review of the data to find gaps in student experience more contemporaneously.
The panel would support any additional support the Trust can provide to the programme leads
in allowing for such administrative tasks to be devolved from the programme leads themselves.
In the absence of such additional support, the programme leads must introduce a mechanism
to increase the frequency of reviews of student data. Increased and more wide-ranging
reconciliation of attainment against learning outcomes should be considered as a tool to bring
all information pertaining to students together and to create more effective monitoring.
Requirement 15: Students must have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and should undertake each activity relating to patient care on
sufficient occasions to enable them to develop the skills and the level of competency to
achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes (Requirement Met)
The panel found the prescribed numbers for differing types of clinical procedures set by the
programme leads to be sufficient to allow the required level of competency for a safe beginner.
Evidence was seen that student clinical data is discussed at team plenary meetings. Students
advised the panel that they are often alerted if they are falling behind in achieving the numbers
of procedures required.
While patient supply in some areas was described by the programme leads as an issue in the
past, this has been rectified by advertising for patients in the local press. As a result, the
numbers of specific patient types available for treatment by students has risen, allowing
students to gain sufficient experience. Additionally, one of the outreach placements allows for
walk-in patients so students may experience a range of issues and gain a better understanding
of what general practice will be like.
Requirement 16: Providers must demonstrate that assessments are fit for purpose and
deliver results which are valid and reliable. The methods of assessment used must be
appropriate to the learning outcomes, in line with current and best practice and be
routinely monitored, quality assured and developed. (Requirement Partly Met)
A variety of assessment types, both formative and summative, are utilised during the
programme. The programme leads advised that the assessments are discussed each year and
changed if required. An example was given of recent changes to a poster project, which must
now cover a topic not included within the teaching of the programme to better test students’
research skills, but evidence of such changes to other assessments was not provided. The
changes to assessments year on year is not recorded.
Clinical assessments are completed by the supervisors on clinic and supported by clear
marking criteria. The marking criteria differentiate between the levels of skill expected of
students at each stage of the programme.
16

Student data was seen at the examination inspection. These data demonstrated that the
assessments preceding the final RCSEng examinations discriminate between those students
ready for the examinations and those that are not. A small number of students were required to
undertake additional clinical work or repeat their final year before being entered for the final
examinations at a later date.
The written papers and the case presentations for the final RCSEng examination are subject to
scrutiny and comment from the internal and external examiners alike. All comments are
recorded and are fed into a Faculty level examination board meeting at the College. Similarly,
the programme’s final examination in Year One is also reviewed by an external examiner who
provides a report of their findings to aid quality assurance and fairness.
Despite the scrutiny afforded to the RCSEng final examinations, the panel found that the case
presentations did not test the student’s knowledge to an adequate level. According to mapping
documents, the final case presentations are meant to test students on the following GDC
learning outcomes:
1.1.3 Explain general & systemic diseases and their relevance to oral health
1.1.4 Explain the aetiology & pathogenesis of oral disease
The questions asked during the case presentations did not include enough depth to satisfy the
panel that the above learning outcomes were being adequately tested at this final stage of the
programme. Students were not routinely asked to explain their answers to provide more detail
of the underlying aetiology of the conditions identified in their patients. The case presentation
guidelines from RCSEng stipulate that a satisfactory case presentation will involve the
candidate demonstrating “understanding of [the] scientific basis for treatment”. The panel did
not find that all satisfactory case presentations met this criteria.
The panel found that the students were appropriately marked as satisfactory and noted that the
learning outcomes are covered within other assessments. However, the depth of the
questioning needs to be reviewed by the College and fed back to examiners, particularly if
programmes are relying on the RCSEng examinations to test learning outcomes 1.13 and
1.14.
To meet the requirement, RCSEng must address the level of questioning required for students
to demonstrate achievement of the requisite learning outcomes. The programme leads must
ensure that the learning outcomes are robustly tested in the assessments indicated in the
mapping documents.
Requirement 17: Assessment must utilise feedback collected from a variety of sources,
which should include other members of the dental team, peers, patients and/or
customers. (Requirement Partly Met)
The variety of feedback collected on the programme is limited. Evaluation forms are completed
at the end of each module, but the feedback students may give on clinic or during personal
tutor meetings is not logged. There is no formal mechanism for peer feedback.
Within one outreach placement patient feedback is collected after every interaction, but this
system has not been rolled out across other placements or the community dental services that
students attend. Some feedback may be obtained from the Patient Advice and Liaison Service
(PALS) but this will not be specific to the student who treated that patient. The school has
trialled a paperless system for collecting patient feedback but this was not found to be robust.
There are plans to introduce a rolling method of comment collection whereby patient feedback
17

would be gathered over a series of appointments and then shared with the relevant student by
the programme leads. No timeframe was given for when such a process would be in place.
To fully meet this requirement, the programme leads must implement additional collection of
patient feedback from all clinical areas to inform students of patient views relating to their
performance. The panel would strongly support any method that would allow for studentspecific feedback, with a supporting policy that defines how this will be disseminated and used
by students.
Requirement 18: The provider must support students to improve their performance by
providing regular feedback and by encouraging students to reflect on their practice.
(Requirement Met)
Feedback to students is a regular part of the programme. All clinical log sheets include a
section for supervisors to give constructive feedback to students, and these are completed
after every patient interaction. The students also meet with their personal tutors on a twicetermly basis which gives the opportunity for feedback on their overall performance and
progression.
Reflection is also built into the programme with the completion of reflective logs. The students
that the panel met with all reported that the reflective logs were useful, even if their purpose
was not immediately obvious at the outset of the programme. Those students from the
graduating cohort stated that they were able to see how much progress they had made since
the first year, which was also helpful for their development.
Requirement 19: Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills, experience and
training to undertake the task of assessment, including appropriate general or specialist
registration with a UK regulatory body. Examiners/ assessors should have received
training in equality and diversity relevant for their role. (Requirement Met)
All members of staff involved with examining or assessing students are registered with the
GDC. Those responsible for teaching on the programme and supervising students on clinic are
also employees of the Trust, and therefore subject to statutory training including that on
equality and diversity.
All those responsible for assessing students during the final exams have been trained to
assess students by RCSEng. Some variances in examiner practice was noted by the panel; for
example, some examiners used subjective comments such as “good” or “fine”. The examiner
pairs were not always consistent in the questions they asked, for example, reflective practice
was not covered at every case presentation. Some examiners allowed students to continue
answering a question after the signal was given for the exam to stop, whereas others did not.
The RCSEng does provide a QA Examination Lead, who acts as an overseer in order to
quality assess the exams. The subjective commenting was noted by the QA Examination Lead
who advised that examiners had been told not to do this in past training sessions. The issue of
some examiners allowing students to go over the allotted time to answer a question was not
raised.
External examiners are used to actively examine students, and must be involved in teaching in
order to be eligible for the role. Considering the presence of the QA Examination Lead, the
panel found that oversight of the exams’ quality as a whole was still achieved.
The panel found the requirement to be met but would urge RCSEng to ensure that all
examiners are reminded as to examination best practice.

18

Requirement 20: Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent to which
assessment processes are rigorous, set at the correct standard, ensure equity of
treatment for students and have been fairly conducted. The responsibilities of the
external examiners must be clearly documented. (Requirement Met)
External examiners are utilised by the programme leads for the final examination at the end of
Year One. The examiner reports on the robustness and administration of the examination.
Their role is defined in policy.
The external examiners for the final examinations are recruited and retained by RCSEng. The
terms of their tenure are also defined in policy and they must attend training provided by the
Royal College. External examiners comment on all aspects of the examinations, including
marking criteria and standard setting, but are not responsible for these areas. The QA
Examination Lead is responsible for ensuring equity and fairness during the exams, while a
board of examiners at the RCSEng standard sets the exams, calculates the pass mark and
maintains a question bank.
Requirement 21: Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear criteria. The
standard expected of students in each area to be assessed must be clear and students
and staff involved in assessment must be aware of this standard. An appropriate
standard setting process must be employed for summative assessments. (Requirement
Partly Met)
The RCSEng final examinations and in-programme assessments are all well-documented.
Students have a handbook which sets out the assessment timetable. The students who
participated in panel meetings reported that they understood what was expected of them and
were clear on the assessments. Mock examinations were held in preparation for the finals.
The final case presentation examinations were exceptionally well run. Ample members of staff
were available not only to supervise waiting students and direct them to the correct locations,
but were also utilised as scribes to note the questions asked during the case presentations. All
timings were adhered to and students were examined on time. A technical difficulty with the
provider’s server meant that it was not possible to see radiographs during the case
presentations. This was addressed by a set of standardised questions being imposed by
RCSEng onto all examiners to ensure that this area of the exam was covered adequately. The
Royal College are to be commended on finding a solution and working around what could be a
significant issue with apparent ease.
As discussed under Requirement 16, the level of questioning led the panel to find that the case
presentations had not been conducted wholly under the set criteria. In addition to this, each
student was examined by an internal and external examiner, who took turns in asking
questions yet had very little time for calibration. Approximately five minutes was allowed
between a student finishing and examiners receiving notes on the next case presentation. The
panel were not satisfied that this amount of time was sufficient to allow the examiners to read
the notes in detail and then formulate questions, particularly as examiners do not have sight of
these notes before the exams. The panel found that, in conjunction with the issue regarding
the depth of questioning, this amount of preparation time was insufficient.
The programme leads had undertaken some standard setting exercises with the course team.
Some staff have completed RCSEng training on this topic but not all, due to time constraints.
Those who attended disseminated learning to the rest of the team. The standard setting
methodology for clinical assessments was not clear. For written examinations, the Angoff
method is employed with the course team meeting at the beginning of each term to agree the
pass mark. Those that write examination questions are responsible for writing the answer
marking guides.
19

The final exams are entirely standard set by RCSEng. The Angoff method is also employed by
the College and the calculation of the pass marks was explained to the panel. There is no
compensation between different parts of the final examinations. The written examinations are
double blind marked by the external and internal examiners. The papers are divided into
different parts so no examiner will mark an entire examination. The examiner pairs for each
part met during the finals to discuss their individual marks and come to a joint decision. This
process was underpinned by marking guides.
The panel were satisfied with the process of standard setting by RCSEng although this may
need to be reviewed and modified as the issue of question depth is considered. For the
programme assessments, standard setting needs to be embedded further and to be better
documented. The processes used to ensure fairness of assessments must be documented, to
create both an audit trail and for the leads’ own reference and use should a student dispute the
accuracy or fairness of their marks.
Additionally, the opportunity for effective calibration and review of the final case presentation
notes must be increased. The panel would advocate the notes being available for review prior
to the examinations taking place. Not only would this allow for more effective examination of
the individual student but would assist in achieving the depth of questioning deemed necessary
by the panel.
Actions
No
13

14

16 &
21

17

19

21

21

Actions for the Provider
Increased recording regarding student progression and mapping
of the programme to the learning outcomes should be
introduced.
The programme leads must collate and review student data
regularly. Additional sources of support should be sought to
facilitate this regular review, potentially with the assistance of
the Trust.
The examinations provider must improve the depth of
questioning employed to test students on all relevant learning
outcomes. The programme leads must ensure that all
assessments robustly test the outcomes they are designed to
cover.
Regular and comprehensive patient feedback must be collected
across all clinical sites. Programme leads must gather all
relevant forms of feedback, including peer feedback and
implement a mechanism to gather, record and act on this.
Examiners should be reminded of examination best practice in
line with RCSEng training. Particular attention should be drawn
to the elements raised in this report.
Standard setting of in-programme assessments must be
implemented across all assessments and well documented.
RCSEng must allow additional time for calibration between
examiner pairs.

Due date
N/A

Annual
Monitoring
2017/18
Annual
Monitoring
2017/18

Annual
Monitoring
2017/18
N/A

Annual
Monitoring
2017/18
Annual
Monitoring
2017/18

20

Summary of Actions
Req.
Action
number

Observations

Due date

Response from Provider
1.1

3

Programme leads must implement plans for clinical
audits or a similar plan to ensure that clinical areas
are safe for students.

This has been placed as an item for the Jan 2017 plenary Annual Monitoring
agenda to be assigned to staff and areas for auditing 2017/18
will be discussed.
In addition, there is to be collaboration with the Trust’s
auditing team to ensure that practical and useful audit
takes places that offer a good learning and reflective
experience.

1.2

4

Programme leads must ensure that supervision levels
are consistent at outreach placements at all times.

The staff-student ratio will remain at 1:5 (in outreach Annual Monitoring
placements this will be 1:2). We have now recently 2017/18
taken on several staff and the team numbers have been
increased, at times the staff ratio is 2:5.

1.3

5

Programme leads must extend supervisor training to
outreach supervisors.

This has been enhanced and training has already Annual Monitoring
been discussed with community clinic supervisors. 2017/18
Arrangements are in place to meet community
outreach supervisors once a term however,
discussed can be raised ‘as and when’ via email.
The lead for community outreach is to be invited to
future plenary meetings and community tutors are
invited to attend child restorative skills course
session to calibrate teaching techniques.

7

Process must be implemented that demonstrates that
programme staff and leads identify, resolve, and learn
from clinical incidents.

Incident reports from clinical governance meetings will
be forwarded on to all staff. In addition, this will be
added to termly staff meetings. Any clinical incidents

Annual Monitoring
2017/18

21

will be shared at the weekly morning meetings. This
ensures all staff are included as minutes are sent out.
1.4

9

The findings of the inspection report must be shared
with the Trust. Options for additional support must be
formally explored between the Trust and the
programme leads.

1.5

9 & 10

Formalisation of the quality management of the
programme and increased recording must be
implemented.

10

A contingency plan to counter unexpected staff
absence must be discussed and defined in writing.

With recent staff recruitment, this means the clinics Annual Monitoring
are staffed with potentially a ‘floating’ member of 2017/18
staff which will accommodate for absences.

11

Policy regarding the use of feedback must be
introduced to ensure that this information is formally
considered and used to develop the programme.
Quality assurance measures for outreach placements
must be introduced. Patient feedback methods must
be rolled out across all sites.

This will be developed over the course of the year Annual Monitoring
and will be placed at every termly staff meeting.
2017/18

12

13

14

Increased recording regarding student progression
and mapping of the programme to the learning
outcomes should be introduced.
The programme leads must collate and review
student data regularly. Additional sources of support
should be sought to facilitate this regular review,
potentially with the assistance of the Trust.

This will be completed once finalised and the
programme leads have already discussed ways
to restructure to provide more support to the
department. The initial draft report has already
been shared with the Trust’s General Manager.
This will be done in collaboration with item 9, to
ensure this is implemented. However, both items
would require business proposals and
negotiation with the Trust and is likely to be a
lengthy process.

During the next summer term programme leads
will meet and assess the outreach clinics as part of
a quality assurance process.
However,
communications with these leads of these sites will
continue to be ongoing as they have been. The
feedback forms will be rolled out into each of these
clinics.
This will be incorporated into the staff structural
changes assoc in item 9 as this will give
opportunity for this to happen.
This will be incorporated into the staff structural
changes assoc in item 9

Annual Monitoring
2017/18

Annual Monitoring
2017/18

Annual Monitoring
2017/18

N/A

Annual Monitoring
2017/18

22

16 & 21

The examinations provider must improve the depth of
questioning employed to test students on all relevant
learning outcomes. The programme leads must
ensure that all assessments robustly test the
outcomes they are designed to cover.

This will be discussed with College at the next Annual Monitoring
examiners meeting.
2017/18
The RCS have been made aware of the comments
made from this inspection.
In regards to internal assessments formative or
summative – learning outcomes in each module
are mapped against (and clearly stated within
documentation) the Preparing for Practice
document.

17

Regular and comprehensive patient feedback must be
collected across all clinical sites. Programme leads
must gather all relevant forms of feedback, including
peer feedback and implement a mechanism to gather,
record and act on this.

This is currently taking place on the KCH and
Norwood sites. However, measures will take
place to roll out to community clinics.
The feedback forms are collated on a database
and then redistributed to the students as part of
their Personal Development Portfolio, additionally
they must use these forms to present in their
reflective practice sessions.
Responses that require action have been
forwarded to the Trust/department for a
response/action.

19

Examiners should be reminded of examination best
practice in line with RCSEng training. Particular
attention should be drawn to the elements raised in
this report.

21

21

Standard setting of in-programme assessments must
be implemented across all assessments and well
documented.
RCSEng must allow additional time for calibration
between examiner pairs.

Annual Monitoring
2017/18

N/A
This will be discussed with College at the next
examiners meeting. As per item 16/21 the RCS
have been made aware of the comments from this
inspection.
This is ongoing and must be done incrementally –
due to 100% part-time faculty. The majority of the
assessments have been completed.
This will be discussed with College at the next
examiners meeting.
As per item 16/21/19 the RCS have been made
aware of the comments from this inspection.

Annual Monitoring
2017/18
Annual Monitoring
2017/18

23

Observations from the provider on content of report
Requirement 1 – for progression of Year 1 to Year 2 requires successful completion of an OSCE but also a 12 part essay examination
Requirement 3 – the programme leads are assured that the clinical areas are appropriate for treatment and learning. The sites used by
the students have undergone regulatory inspection processes in additional to educational inspection. All the sites are used by other
teaching departments such as the school of Dental Nursing and King’s College, London BDS students. These establishments in
collaboration with the Trust have deemed the environments safe and appropriate for the skills that need to be attained from these facilities.
Requirement 4 – Following this incident the Director met with the Lead clinician at Norwood Academy. Steps have now been taken to
ensure that no student works alone. If a student is absent for any reason nursing support must be supplied by the nursing staff at
Norwood. The clinical set up of Norwood is individual surgeries thus simulating the practice setting therefore the member of staff in charge
of hygiene and therapy students supervises two surgeries, so there will be moments where tutors will not be present in the room but
he/she is always available if required.
Requirement 9 – The programme is mapped in the individual modules. However, blueprinting for each assessment will be mapped against
the learning outcomes and each student will be monitored against this.
Requirement 12 - Communications with the community clinic dental officers/lead of community services and clinical director is frequent.
Should incidences/feedback occur then communication is immediate along monthly meetings with the clinical director (who is lead of
community services). We are in regular communication with the Deputy Clinical Lead who is directly responsible for the staff in the
community clinic.
Requirement 17: Personal Tutor Meetings – are logged and placed in the students personal file (which is held secure in the department –
due to their confidential content), it would be inappropriate to place these in the logbooks. The template of the personal tutor meeting was
included in the evidence folders of the pre-documentation - Standard 3 – 3.18 – Appendix 2.
Requirement 17: The hardcopy system was in place during the time of the inspection an example of the patient feedback form was
presented in the pre-inspection data Standard 3 – 3.18 Appendix 6 – Student Patient feedback form. The collation of these feedback
forms was presented at the time of the inspection along with a meeting with the feedback co-ordinator. The individual identity of the
students was withheld in the results of these feedback forms, which were presented in the additional documentations folder which was
available during the inspection and held by the panel to date.

24

Recommendations to the GDC
The inspectors recommend that this qualification continues to be approved for holders to apply for registration as a dental hygienist and
therapist with the General Dental Council.
The School must provide detailed information regarding how they have met, or are endeavouring to meet, the required actions set down in this
report.

25

Appendix 1
Inspection process and purpose of Inspection
1.

As part of its duty to protect patients and promote high standards within the professions
it regulates, the General Dental Council (GDC) quality assures the education and
training of student dentists and dental care professionals (DCPs) at institutions whose
qualifications enable the holder to apply for registration with the GDC and new
qualifications where it is intended that the qualification will lead to registration.

2.

The aim of this quality assurance activity is to ensure that these institutions produce a
new registrant who has demonstrated, on graduation, that he or she has met the
outcomes required for registration with the GDC. This is to ensure that students who
obtain a qualification leading to registration are fit to practise at the level of a safe
beginner.

3.

The inspection focuses on three Standards, with a total of 21 underlying Requirements.
These are contained in the document Standards for Education.

4.

The purpose of this inspection was to make a recommendation to the GDC to determine
whether the Diploma in Dental Hygiene and Therapy should continue to be approved as
a route for registration as a dental hygienist and therapist. The GDC’s powers are
derived under the Dentists Act 1984 (as amended) under The General Dental Council
(Professions Complementary to Dentistry) (Qualifications and Supervision of Dental
Work) [DCP] Rules Order of Council 2006.

5.

Inspection reports may highlight areas of strength and draw attention to areas requiring
improvement and development, including actions that are required to be undertaken by
the provider. Where an action is needed for a Requirement to be met, the term ‘must’ is
used to describe the obligation on the provider to undertake this action. For these
actions the inspectors may stipulate a specific timescale by which the action must be
completed or when an update on progress must be provided. In their observations on
the content of the report, the provider should confirm the anticipated date by which
these actions will be completed. Where an action would improve how a Requirement is
met, the term ‘should’ is used and for these actions there will be no due date stipulated.
Providers will be asked to report on the progress in addressing the required actions
through the annual monitoring process. Serious concerns about a lack of progress may
result in further inspections or other quality assurance activity.

6.

The provider of the qualification has the opportunity to provide factual corrections on the
draft report. Following the production of the final report the provider is asked to submit
observations on, or objections to, the report and the actions listed. Where the inspection
panel have recommended that the programme be approved for registration, the Council
of the GDC have delegated responsibility to the GDC Registrar to consider the
recommendations of the panel. Should an inspection panel not be able to recommend
approval, the report and observations would be presented to the Council of the GDC for
consideration.

Evaluation of Qualification against the Standards for Education

26

7.

As stated above, the Standards for Education were used as a framework for this
inspection. The provider was requested to undertake a self-evaluation of the programme
against the individual Requirements under the Standards for Education. This involved
stating whether each Requirement is met, partly met or not met and to provide evidence
in support of their evaluation. The inspection panel examined this evidence, requested
further documentary evidence and gathered additional evidence from discussions with
staff and students.

8.

The inspection panel used the following descriptors to reach a decision on the extent to
which the Diploma meets each Requirement:

A Requirement is met if:
“There is sufficient appropriate evidence derived from the inspection process. This
evidence provides the inspectors with broad confidence that the provider demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students is supportive
of documentary evidence and the evidence is robust, consistent and not contradictory.
There may be minor deficiencies in the evidence supplied but these are likely to be
inconsequential.”
A Requirement is partly met if:
“Evidence derived from the inspection process is either incomplete or lacks detail and, as
such, fails to convince the inspection panel that the provider fully demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students may not fully
support the evidence submitted or there may be contradictory information in the evidence
provided. There is, however, some evidence of compliance and it is likely that either (a) the
appropriate evidence can be supplied in a short time frame, or, (b) any deficiencies
identified can be addressed and evidenced in the annual monitoring process.”
A Requirement is not met if:
“The provider cannot provide evidence to demonstrate a Requirement or the evidence
provided is not convincing. The information gathered at the inspection through meetings
with staff and students does not support the evidence provided or the evidence is
inconsistent and/or incompatible with other findings. The deficiencies identified are such as
to give rise to serious concern and will require an immediate action plan from the provider.
The consequences of not meeting a Requirement in terms of the overall sufficiency of a
programme will depend upon the compliance of the provider across the range of
Requirements and the possible implications for public protection.”

27

