INSPECTION REPORT
Education provider/ Awarding University of Bristol
Body:
Programme/Award:
Remit and purpose:

Diploma in Hygiene
Diploma in Therapy
Full inspection referencing the Standards for
Education to determine approval of the award for
the purpose of registration with the GDC as a
Dental Hygienist or a Dental Therapist

Learning Outcomes:

Preparing for Practice (Dental Hygiene or Dental
Therapy)

Programme inspection dates:

24 – 25 January 2017

Examination inspection
dates:

15 March 2017 – Therapy Exam
14 June 2017 – Hygiene Exam

Inspection panel:

Michael Yates (Chair and Lay Member)
Joanne Brindley (DCP Member)
Christine Cotton (DCP Member)
Barbara Chadwick (Dentist Member)

GDC Staff:

Rachael Mendel
James Marshall (Programme only)
Krutika Patel (Therapy Exam only)
Recommended that the Diploma in Therapy
remain sufficient for registration as a dental
therapist.

Outcome:

Recommended that the Diploma in Hygiene
remain sufficient for registration as a dental
hygienist.

1

Full details of the inspection process can be found in the annex
Inspection summary
The inspection team was pleased with the documentation received for both programmes in
advance of the inspection and during the inspection. The documentation received was filed
in a logical order so the panel were able to find the evidence demonstrating how each
requirement was met. Any documentation requested during the inspection was provided in a
timely manner.
It was evident that both programmes had small dedicated teams who provided support to all
the students. The students were extremely positive about the staff on the programme and
noted how approachable and willing they were to go beyond what would be expected of
them in order to assist a student. It was clear that the small cohorts allowed the programmes
to address any concerns or issues that arose with individual students or with the programme
overall quickly. However, the small cohort and close working relationships within the
programme led to issues being dealt with informally and often without an evidence trail. The
use of formal policies and procedures should be used to ensure all students are treated
equitably and in order to keep accurate records of all incidents, issues or concerns.
The small cohort and infrequent collation of students’ clinical data from across all sites
compromised the hygiene programme by making it difficult to monitor student progression.
While the panel were confident that upon graduation, students on both programmes were fit
to practise as safe beginners, the recording processes for hygiene students clinical work was
not robust and it was noted that these processes need to be improved.
The inspectors noted that the staff were working in a challenging environment, with specific
regard to funding issues, the cessation of the therapy programme and the uncertainty of how
the programmes will move forward in the future. However, it was clear to that the
programme staff worked well as a team and were passionate about the programme and
education of the students.

2

Background and overview of Qualification
Annual intake Hygiene
Annual intake Therapy
Programme duration Hygiene
Programme duration Therapy

8 students
6 students
X weeks over x months/years
Dental Hygiene – Full time 91 weeks over
21 months
Dental Therapy – Part time 2 days per
week over 24 months

Format of programme Hygiene

: Year One
Basic principles; system based learning;
simulated learning Preclinical competencies
completed; Transition to clinics
Year Two
Develop competences; expanded clinical
attachments; Preparing for Practice

Format of programme Therapy
Year One
Basic principles; system based learning;
simulated learning; (preclinical adult
restorative) Transition to clinics; Preclinical
paediatric
Year Two
Develop competences; Paediatric clinical
sessions; expanded clinical attachments
Preparing for Practice

The panel wishes to thank the staff, students, and external stakeholders involved with the
Diploma in Hygiene and Diploma in Therapy programmes for their co-operation and
assistance with the inspection.

3

Standard 1 – Protecting patients
Providers must be aware of their duty to protect the public. Providers must ensure that
patient safety is paramount and care of patients is of an appropriate standard. Any risk
to the safety of patients and their care by students must be minimised.
Requirements
Met
Partly Not
met
met
1. Students must provide patient care only when they have
demonstrated adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical
procedures, the student should be assessed as competent in
the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients.
2. Providers must have systems in place to inform patients that
they may be treated by students and the possible implications
of this. Patient agreement to treatment by a student must be
obtained and recorded prior to treatment commencing.
3. Students must only provide patient care in an environment
which is safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with
relevant legislation and requirements regarding patient care,
including equality and diversity, wherever treatment takes
place.
4. When providing patient care and services, providers must
ensure that students are supervised appropriately according to
the activity and the student’s stage of development.
5. Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained.
This should include training in equality and diversity
legislation relevant for the role. Clinical supervisors must
have appropriate general or specialist registration with a
UK regulatory body.
6. Providers must ensure that students and all those involved in
the delivery of education and training are aware of their
obligation to raise concerns if they identify any risks to patient
safety and the need for candour when things go wrong.
Providers should publish policies so that it is clear to all
parities how concerns will be raised and how these concerns
will be acted upon. Providers must support those who do raise
concerns and provide assurance that staff and students will
not be penalised for doing so.
7. Systems must be in place to identify and record issues that may
affect patient safety. Should a patient safety issue arise,
appropriate action must be taken by the provider and where
necessary the relevant regulatory body should be notified.
8. Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and
apply as required. The content and significance of the student
fitness to practise procedures must be conveyed to students
and aligned to GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance.
4

Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be
familiar with the GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance.
Providers must also ensure that the GDC’s Standards for the
Dental Team are embedded within student training.

Requirement 1: Students must provide patient care only when they have demonstrated
adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical procedures, the student should be
assessed as competent in the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients. (Requirement Met)
A range of evidence was provided to demonstrate that students only provided patient care
when they had adequate knowledge and skills. The School makes use of gateway
assessments that need to be passed before students can progress to working on clinic. Both
programmes start pre-clinical work in week two of the programme while therapy students are
all registered dental hygienists and are expected to already have a certain level of dexterity
and clinical knowledge when commencing the programme.
Competence is assessed in several ways for both programmes, including through the use of
pre-clinical logs that are monitored by staff on a regular basis, formative assessments are
used throughout pre-clinical training to ensure students are progressing appropriately. A
gateway assessment as well as a summative online assessment must be passed before
students can progress onto clinic to ensure the students have the appropriate level of skill and
knowledge.
Requirement 2: Providers must have systems in place to inform patients that they may
be treated by students and the possible implications of this. Patient agreement to
treatment by a student must be obtained and recorded prior to treatment commencing.
(Requirement Met)
Patients are informed in numerous ways that they may be treated by students. The Bristol
Dental Hospital website states that it is a teaching hospital and explains that they will be
treated by students under supervision. When patients are referred to the hospital, and
assessed by the relevant consultant, patients are again told that they will be treated by
students and verbal consent is received.
New patients receive a welcome letter from the hospital which outlines treatment may take
longer than usual to complete because a student will be undertaking the treatment under the
supervision of qualified staff. Posters are displayed in the waiting rooms to inform patients that
it is a teaching hospital. The students are also required to wear scrubs that state that they are
either student hygienists or student therapists.
All patients who attend a student dental hygienist or therapist clinic have their proposed
treatment reiterated to them under the supervision of a tutor. Verbal and written consent is
obtained for each course of treatment and consent is gained again for specific procedures
such as dental extractions.
Requirement 3: Students must only provide patient care in an environment which is
safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with relevant legislation and
requirements regarding patient care, including equality and diversity, wherever
treatment takes place. (Requirement Met)

5

During the inspection, the panel were satisfied that the school complied with all relevant
legislation and requirements regarding patient care. Bristol Dental Hospital is a registered
organisation with Care Quality Commission (CQC) to be a provider of dental services. The
Dental School has also been awarded an Athena SWAN silver award. As students undertake
all their clinical activity at the Bristol Dental Hospital facilities, the clinical governance
frameworks for the students falls under the auspices of UHBristol and they therefore have to
undertake the statutory and mandatory hospital training.
UHBristol NHS foundation Trust is an authorised Public Benefit Corporation and is therefore
required to comply with governance standards set out by the NHS Act; students are subject to
all Trust protocols for ensuring a safe and appropriate working environment.
Requirement 4: When providing patient care and services, providers must ensure that
students are supervised appropriately according to the activity and the student’s stage
of development. (Requirement Met)
Both the hygiene and therapy programmes have small cohorts and are therefore closely
supervised by the staff when on clinic, especially during the first year of training and when
students initially start treating patients. Students provide direct clinical care according to their
stage of training and development. The timetable is structured to allow teaching and learning
to be appropriate to the student stage of development. The feedback from students of both
programmes was overwhelmingly positive and they felt that the staff were supportive and
approachable if they needed assistance.
The panel noted that the small teams on both programmes ensured that there was a high level
of communication between staff and that all students were closely monitored and supervised
by dedicated staff; any issues or concerns could be picked up quickly and dealt with efficiently.
The Diploma in Dental Therapy lead supervised all paediatric treatments plans and was
therefore aware of how well the therapy students were progressing throughout the
programme. Issues were picked up immediately rather than at an end-of-term formal meeting.
These small teams allowed any progression issues to be dealt with quickly, and staff could
provide extra support and remediation to students without delay to ensure students were not
falling behind.

Requirement 5: Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained. This should
include training in equality and diversity legislation relevant for the role. Clinical
supervisors must have appropriate general or specialist registration with a UK
regulatory body. (Requirement Met)
All staff involved in teaching students are appropriately qualified and registered with the GDC
and hold a clinical contract with UHBristol NHS Trust together with having honorary clinical
status with the University of Bristol. All staff have attended the UHBristol clinical induction
course which includes equality and diversity training, training regarding conditions such as
dementia and learning disabilities as well as the Mental Health Capacity Act (2005). A ‘Living
the Value’ session is covered which includes communication and behaviour, describes the
Trusts’ culture and values and outlines the expected behaviours of staff.
The panel saw evidence of the mandatory training logs during the inspection, highlighting
training the staff had completed and when their certifications need to be repeated. All staff
training was completed and up to date. The panel noted that not all staff had a teaching
qualification and while the panel were assured that all staff were appropriately qualified, it
6

would be beneficial to the programme and the staff if their professional development was
supported.

Requirement 6: Providers must ensure that students and all those involved in the
delivery of education and training are aware of their obligation to raise concerns if they
identify any risks to patient safety and the need for candour when things go wrong.
Providers should publish policies so that it is clear to all parties how concerns should
be raised and how these concerns will be acted upon. Providers must support those
who do raise concerns and provide assurance that staff and students will not be
penalised for doing so. (Requirement Met)
The panel saw evidence that the School had policies and procedures in place for students to
raise any concerns and these procedures had been provided to students, however, these
policies had not been utilised since no formal concerns had been raised. A raising concerns
policy is in place and both students and all those involved in in the delivery of education and
training are aware of their obligation to raise concerns and the procedures in place to do this.
Students were aware of their options for raising a concern; by talking to a supervisor or tutor,
or by using the student concern form if they had concerns about patient safety relating to other
students or other staff members. Once a concern has been raised, a formal procedure is
followed either through the Trust or University policies depending on the nature of the concern.
The University and the Trust both had whistleblowing policies in place and students were
aware of these and what they needed to do if they had any concerns.
Requirement 7: Systems must be in place to identify and record issues that may affect
patient safety. Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be taken by
the provider and where necessary the relevant regulatory body should be notified.
(Requirement Partly Met)
The Datix reporting system that manages and logs all clinical incidents using an online form is
in place across all clinical sites that the students attend. A manager is required to review any
incidents within 72 hours so the incident can be escalated and managed appropriately. There
is a clear procedure in place for reviewing each incident and actions are put in place to
minimise the risk or re-occurrence. Staff all complete clinical incident training and all clinical
incidents are reported and discussed at the quarterly clinical governance meetings. A staff
member from the DCP school is a member of the committee so this information can then be
disseminated back to the rest of the school.
It was noted that the systems and policies were in place to manage clinical incidents, however,
they did not demonstrate how these policies are put into action when an incident occurs and
no audit trail was available to demonstrate how the information is logged and disseminated
throughout the school. The panel recommends that formal processes are put in place to
ensure that all incidents are logged, actioned and disseminated appropriately. Issues should
be discussed at team meetings and noted in the minutes. Communication with students about
safely issues on clinic must also be formally recorded with clear feedback mechanisms in
place.
Requirement 8: Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and apply as
required. The content and significance of the student fitness to practise procedures
must be conveyed to students and aligned to GDC Student Fitness to Practise
Guidance. Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar with the
GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance. Providers must also ensure that the GDC’s
Standard for the Dental Team are embedded within student training. (Requirement Met)
7

The Director of DCP training is a member of the Faculty’s Fitness to Practise panel while
another member of staff is a fitness to practise case investigator. The school has fitness to
practise policies in place and staff and students can complete a student concern form to be
considered by the Faculty within Fitness to Practise procedures.
Students are required to read the GDC Student Fitness to Practise documentation and
students are provided with advice to familiarise them with examples, in the documentation, of
behaviours that may cause concerns. Students are also required to sign and return a
document confirming that they have read and understood the Fitness to Practise information
within their first month of training. Information about professional behaviour expectations is
also presented to students during the induction week.
The panel noted that all policies were in place, students were aware of these policies and how
to address any concerns they may have. It was also noted that because the cohorts for both
programmes were small, any issues were picked up immediately which has resulted in no
Student Fitness to Practise cases being brought through.
While the panel note that a small cohort means that any Student Fitness to Practise concerns
can be managed quickly and sometimes fairly informally, the school should not become
complacent regarding the need to adhere to policies and procedures.

Actions
No
Actions for the Provider
7
Formal processes must be put in place to ensure that all
incidents are logged, actioned and disseminated appropriately.

Due date
Annual
Monitoring
2017/2018

8

Standard 2 – Quality evaluation and review of the programme
The provider must have in place effective policy and procedures for the monitoring and
review of the programme.
Requirements
Met
Partly Not
met
met
9. The provider must have a framework in place that details how
it manages the quality of the programme which includes
making appropriate changes to ensure the curriculum
continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and
adapts to changing legislation and external guidance. There
must be a clear statement about where responsibility lies for
this function.
10. Any concerns identified through the Quality Management
framework, including internal and external reports relating to
quality, must be addressed as soon as possible and the GDC
notified of serious threats to students achieving the learning
outcomes.
11. Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external
quality assurance procedures. External quality assurance
should include the use of external examiners, who should be
familiar with the GDC learning outcomes and their context
and QAA guidelines should be followed where applicable.
Patient and/or customer feedback must be collected and
used to inform programme development.
12. The provider must have effective systems in place to quality
assure placements where students deliver treatment to
ensure that patient care and student assessment across all
locations meets these Standards. The quality assurance
systems should include the regular collection of student and
patient feedback relating to placements.

GDC comments
Requirement 9: The provider must have a framework in place that details how it
manages the quality of the programme which includes making appropriate changes to
ensure the curriculum continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and adapts
to changing legislation and external guidance. There must be a clear statement about
where responsibility lies for this function. (Requirement Partly Met)
The awarding body for both programmes is the University of Bristol, the programmes are
therefore accountable to the University policies and procedures. The programmes make use of
two frameworks to manage the quality assurance of the programmes, a local and direct
framework specific to the diploma and the University of Bristol framework.
The Dental Education Committee (DEC) has the remit to deliver and quality assure both
programmes. Under the DEC there are a number of sub-committees which include the Dental
Teaching Committee and the Dental Assessment Committee, where any programme issues
can be referred.

9

Both programmes are fully evaluated each year via the Annual Programme Review (APR).
The programmes rely heavily on this process for quality assurance purposes and paperwork
was presented at the time of the inspection to verify this. Additionally the programme have a
DCP standing item at DTC and DEC to ensure representation at these meetings and validity of
the programme.
The panel saw clear evidence of how both programme curricula were mapped to the latest
GDC learning outcomes, however they did not see a clear audit trail of how any changes to
the curricula were passed through the Committees and they felt that there was an over
reliance of programme staff taking on this responsibility without any support from the
University as several committees had a heavy BDS focus. The panel recommends the
University Committees seek to make them less BDS focussed and use them as a way to work
across all dental programmes.
Any changes to the Diploma programmes have a clear process which they must follow. Any
changes are discussed initially at APR, then DEC and DTC. The actions are then followed
through with the Academic Quality and Policy Office (AQPO). Depending on the nature of the
changes, approval is then sought via the Faculty Undergraduate Studies Committee and finally
the Undergraduate Education Committee.
The panel noted that the DCP programmes were reliant on addressing concerns within the
team and that quality mechanisms at a programme level were informal. Programme staff
regularly discuss the programme and student performance but this is on an ad-hoc basis. An
internal risk register noted the significant risk to the programme due to changes in funding and
how this could impact on the type of qualification offered. The programme should formalise
the quality assurance mechanisms at the programme level to ensure that a clear process is
followed.
Requirement 10: Any concerns identified through the Quality Management framework,
including internal and external reports relating to quality, must be addressed as soon
as possible and the GDC notified of serious threats to students achieving the learning
outcomes. (Requirement Met)
As both programmes are small, any concerns that are identified are dealt with quickly and
efficiently. The Annual Programme Review (APR), Faculty Quality Team (FQT) and External
Examiners’ reports are all used as part of the quality management framework. The
programmes indicated that if any concerns arose, they were dealt with as quickly as possible
and where appropriate, dealt with at a local level so as to ensure a speedy resolution to any
issues. As noted in Requirement 4, it is important that policies and procedures are still
followed and the correct committees are involved in any quality assurance concerns, even
when the cohort is small.
Evidence of this taking place was highlighted via the External Examiner reports, where
suggestions were made and the programme were receptive to these suggestions and
addressed their concerns quickly.
The programme did notify the GDC prior to changes in funding to the programme that were
likely to affect how the programme would continue in the future. The panel urge the
programme leads to continue to notify the GDC of any changes to the programme that may
occur due to funding changes.
Requirement 11: Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external quality
assurance procedures. External quality assurance should include the use of external
examiners, who should be familiar with the GDC learning outcomes and their context
and QAA guidelines should be followed where applicable. Patient and/or customer
10

feedback must be collected and used to inform programme development. (Requirement
Partly Met)
Both programmes are subject to external quality assurance and have External Examiners in
place who are involved with dental education at other institutions, are GDC registered and
therefore familiar with GDC learning outcomes. The role of the external examiners is clearly
defined in the ‘Policy for External Examining of Taught Programmes at the University of
Bristol’, with duties that include providing comment and advice on curriculum content,
reviewing draft assessments and to submit an annual report of their finding to the School. The
External Examiners felt that their reports and feedback was used to develop the programme
and they had seen some of their suggestions implemented into the programme.
Feedback is collected from patients but this is done on an ad-hoc basis, rather than formally.
There was no evidence of how this feedback was used to inform and develop the programme.
The provider must implement a system to capture patients’ feedback on their treatment which
is then be used for programme development.
Requirement 12: The provider must have effective systems in place to quality assure
placements where students deliver treatment to ensure that patient care and student
assessment across all locations meets these Standards. The quality assurance systems
should include the regular collection of student and patient feedback relating to
placements. (Requirement Met)
All the sites that both hygiene and therapy students work at are part of the University Hospital
and therefore fall under the governance structures, policies and procedures of UHBristol NHS
Foundation Trust. All sites are set up in a similar way to ensure students are receiving the
same educational experience across all sites albeit with distinct types of patients being seen
across locations.
All staff and students working at placements undertake the hospital induction and the dental
clinical induction and training courses. The DCP staff attend the outreach placements with the
students, so all assessments undertaken at these sites are being marked by the same staff.
This ensures that there is calibration among all sites.
Actions
No
9

11

Actions for the Provider
The provider must formalise the quality assurance mechanisms
at a programme level.
The provider must ensure that there are mechanisms in place to
allow feedback being collected from patients to be used to
inform and develop the programme.

Due date
Annual
Monitoring
2017/2018
Annual
Monitoring
2017/2018

11

Standard 3– Student assessment
Assessment must be reliable and valid. The choice of assessment method must be
appropriate to demonstrate achievement of the GDC learning outcomes. Assessors
must be fit to perform the assessment task.
Requirements
Met
Partly Not
met
met
13. To award the qualification, providers must be assured that
students have demonstrated attainment across the full range
of learning outcomes, and that they are fit to practise at the
level of a safe beginner. Evidence must be provided that
demonstrates this assurance, which should be supported by
a coherent approach to the principles of assessment referred
to in these standards.
14. The provider must have in place management systems to
plan, monitor and centrally record the assessment of
students, including the monitoring of clinical and/or technical
experience, throughout the programme against each of the
learning outcomes.
15. Students must have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients and procedures and should undertake each activity
relating to patient care on sufficient occasions to enable them
to develop the skills and the level of competency to achieve
the relevant learning outcomes.
16. Providers must demonstrate that assessments are fit for
purpose and deliver results which are valid and reliable. The
methods of assessment used must be appropriate to the
learning outcomes, in line with current and best practice and
be routinely monitored, quality assured and developed.
17. Assessment must utilise feedback collected from a variety of
sources, which should include other members of the dental
team, peers, patients and/or customers.
18. The provider must support students to improve their
performance by providing regular feedback and by
encouraging students to reflect on their practice.
19. Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills,
experience and training to undertake the task of assessment,
including appropriate general or specialist registration with a
UK regulatory body. Examiners/assessors should have
received training in equality and diversity relevant for their
role.
20. Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent
to which assessment processes are rigorous, set at the
correct standard, ensure equity of treatment for students and
have been fairly conducted. The responsibilities of the
external examiners must be clearly documented.
21. Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear
criteria. The standard expected of students in each area
12

to be assessed must be clear and students and staff
involved in assessment must be aware of this standard.
An appropriate standard setting process must be
employed for summative assessments.

GDC comments
Requirement 13: To award the qualification, providers must be assured that students
have demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes, and that they
are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner. Evidence must be provided that
demonstrates this assurance, which should be supported by a coherent approach to the
principles of assessment referred to in these standards. (Requirement Partly Met)
Assessment information for both programmes was set out for each module, this included
learning outcomes for each module, assessment criteria and types of assessment used to
determine competence in any given area. The panel saw evidence of the GDC learning
outcomes being mapped against both the modules and assessments for both programmes. At
the programme inspection, the panel saw that frameworks were in place for all formative and
summative assessments to be logged. There was also evidence that all students are assessed
in an appropriate manner to ensure that they are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner.
Students’ clinical logs were stored across several different sites, in a paper format, this meant
that the collation and monitoring of this information was poor. The panel were provided with
data relating to the student’s clinical experience from across a range of sites, however this data
was not up to date at the time of the examinations and had not be collated into one document.
It therefore made it difficult for the panel to determine what experience each student had
gained without cross-refencing a number of sources. Although there are clear criteria students
must achieve to sign up for the final examination, a finalised list of total clinical procedures
each student has attained was not available at the time of the examinations and evidence of
the examination sign up procedure was not clear. The programme stated that given the size of
the programme the tutors could pick up any concerns quickly, while on clinic. However, there
was no documentation providing any evidence discussing when tutors felt a student may need
more experience in a specific area and how the issues were addressed or discuss across the
programme. There was also no evidence or minutes detailing how decisions were made
regarding a student’s eligibility to sit the final examination. Meetings did take place between
staff and students prior to sign up for the exam, but the minutes of these meetings focused on
student performance on assessments, rather than eligibility to sit the exam.
With regards to Dip Dent Therapy the programme director has confirmed that there was
evidence of this within the Dental Therapy staff meeting minutes.

The panel understood that, given the small cohorts, those experiencing difficulty or failing
assessments could easily be identified and provided with the necessary remediation. However,
to ensure each student is being properly monitored throughout the course, the programme
must implement a process which enables all students’ clinical data to be recorded in one place
and updated frequently. This would reduce the risk of the School being challenged by a
student, as they would have accurate data to evidence decisions made in allowing students not
to sit the final exams or progress through the programme. For the same reason, the sign-up
procedure for exams must be formal with an agenda and be minuted showing that all student
data was reviewed in deciding which students could progress to sitting the final examinations.

13

The programme must implement more rigorous recording and monitoring procedures by the
start of the new academic year to ensure that better records of student clinical logs are kept.
Requirement 14: The provider must have in place management systems to plan, monitor
and centrally record the assessment of students, including the monitoring of clinical
and/or technical experience, throughout the programme against each of the learning
outcomes. (Requirement Partly Met)
Students’ clinical activity is monitored continuously, with staff members signing off and
assessing every patient they see. This ensured that any issues with a student’s clinical
proficiencies could be picked up quickly and the student given the opportunity to take part in
remediation activities promptly. This was due to the small teams, rather than the processes
involved for monitoring clinical activity.
As stated in Requirement 13, the monitoring and collation of clinical data needs to be more
robust, most specifically at the outreach sites which needs to be addressed for future cohorts,
to ensure that students are receiving a full range and breadth of patients. It was not clear
whether clinical logs were kept for specialist clinics.
A complete log of all clinical activity had not been produced prior to the hygienist examination.
The logbooks that the panel saw for the hygienist students raised concerns that the student
data was not being collated or monitored regularly. There was a heavy reliance on informal
processes that work because the cohort is small and the tutors know the individual students’
and not because a robust data collection process was in place.
The panel felt that data was collected in silos and that the programmes lacked a central
recording system. A more robust system for collating this data needs to be put in place so that
student progression can be monitored more closely and any issues with experience being
gained can be formally picked up and recorded at a much earlier stage.
Requirement 15: Students must have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and should undertake each activity relating to patient care on
sufficient occasions to enable them to develop the skills and the level of competency to
achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes. (Partly Met)
For both courses, a programme handbook lists all modules and describes what areas of study
will take place under each module and how they will be assessed. A clinical rotation is in place,
providing students with an extensive referral base of patients, which includes patients from
Oral Medicine, Orthodontics, Paediatrics, Special Care Dentistry and Restorative Dentistry
providing students with appropriate breadth of patients.
Throughout the course, nominated tasks in the form of OSCES, nominated must-pass
competencies, case presentations, clinical tasks and reflections must be undertaken to a
satisfactory level for progression. The tasks identified are considered as important skills for the
level of safe beginner at qualification.
The panel were satisfied that the therapy students were exposed to an appropriate breadth of
patients and were competent in achieving the relevant learning outcomes. The documentation
relating to the hygiene students’ progress was not up to date at the time of the examination,
however a log of final clinical totals was provided to the panel after the examination which they
were satisfied with. It was noted that clinical numbers for some of the extended skills
procedures were low and that without a more robust monitoring system this could be
overlooked by the programme. The programme staff said that although there were shortfalls in
some clinical procedures, the students had gained experience in the clinical skills laboratory.
However, this was not evident in the pre-clinical logs.
14

Whilst the panel were confident that students had achieved an appropriate range and breadth
of patients based on the up to date clinical logs that were provided after the hygienist
examinations they were not confident that the clinical logs had been monitored and used in a
formal sign-up process. There is an over reliance on the cohort being small and the staff
knowing how the students are progressing on an individual basis, rather than tracking and
monitoring clinical logs.
Requirement 16: Providers must demonstrate that assessments are fit for purpose and
deliver results which are valid and reliable. The methods of assessment used must be
appropriate to the learning outcomes, in line with current and best practice and be
routinely monitored, quality assured and developed. (Requirement Partly Met)
The school provided evidence that learning outcomes had been mapped to modules and
assessments. The programmes use a combination of both formative and summative
assessments to both drive student learning and ensure that students are progressing through
the programme. Assessments methods used include written examination, clinical case
presentations, practical examinations and clinical scenarios.
The blue printing documentation seen by the inspectors for the hygienist examinations was not
up to date and some of the learning outcomes were not being assessed where they said they
were. The programme should ensure that the blue-printing and mapping documentation is
monitored and updated at each iteration of the examination to ensure the documentation
remains up to date and relevant.
The panel felt that the assessments were appropriate, there was evidence of staff trying to
standard set as best of possible but the staff did note that due to the small teams, the use of a
formal standard setting process such as Angoff was not feasible. Where appropriate, the use
of double blind marking took place.
The panel have suggested that the programmes further align with other university programmes
in order to work together as a wider team so that standard setting could be used for
assessments and the programme can make use of expertise from other programmes.
Requirement 17: Assessment must utilise feedback collected from a variety of sources,
which should include other members of the dental team, peers, patients and/or
customers. (Requirement Partly Met)
The programme provided evidence of feedback that is collected informally from patients
through a patient satisfaction survey. Dental nurses are also asked to provide tutors with
informal feedback about the students which is used to alert tutors of concerns about any
students. The tutors also provide feedback to students in their clinical logbooks.
There are plans in place to develop a more formal method of patient feedback in relation to
assessments and a new E-portfolio is being considered for BDS students for next year. It is
thought that the dental hygiene and therapy students would make use of the same system,
providing more opportunities to be linked to assessments.
Whilst the panel could see evidence of feedback being collected, and the desire to improve the
feedback being collected, the way in which this feedback is currently utilised was not
evidenced. It is collected in an informal manner and any subsequent discussions with students
is not documented. The panel suggests that a more formal approach to collecting and utilising
the feedback takes place.

15

Requirement 18: The provider must support students to improve their performance by
providing regular feedback and by encouraging students to reflect on their practice.
(Requirement Met)
Students are provided immediate feedback on clinic that includes reflecting on transferable
skills such as professionalism and enabling students to reflect on their progress and personal
development. They also have the opportunity to obtain feedback for both written and clinical
assessments with their tutor.
The panel were provided evidence of reflection taking place in the clinical logs. When speaking
with the students it was apparent to the inspection team that they understood the purpose and
importance of reflection. They also stated that they were required to reflect throughout their
pre-clinical and clinical training and how tutors then provided feedback on their reflections.
The students were positive about the process of reflection and found it to be a useful tool to
identify what they had done well and what they could improve on next time. There was also
evidence of students receiving feedback from their mock examinations when being told they
can sign up for their finals, this feedback could have gone further and tutors could have
provided feedback to the students about their clinical skills.
Requirement 19: Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills, experience and
training to undertake the task of assessment, including appropriate general or specialist
registration with a UK regulatory body. Examiners/ assessors should have received
training in equality and diversity relevant for their role. (Requirement Met)
The panel were provided with evidence of the examiners and assessors mandatory training
logs. The DCP staff have been involved in a series of workshops relating to assessment best
practice and standard setting run both internally and externally.
The panel suggest that more formal methods of assessment are used to ensure calibration
occurs across all clinical centres. The programme said they hoped that with the changes to
commissioning and funding and the possible move to being a University programme in its
entirety, a closer working relationship with the BDS programme would offer opportunities for
more inter-professional learning within both programmes.
Requirement 20: Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent to which
assessment processes are rigorous, set at the correct standard, ensure equity of
treatment for students and have been fairly conducted. The responsibilities of the
external examiners must be clearly documented. (Requirement Met)
External Examiners provide written reports using the University pro-forma following each diet
of the examination. The pro-forma asks them to comment on the process of the examination
and other assessments, referencing fairness to students, rigour, benchmarking and
programme specification.
There are clear guidelines set out by the University outlining the expectations of the External
Examiner. There was also clear evidence that the reports were read by the programme leads,
responded to and used to inform changes to the programmes.
External Examiners told the inspectors they were assured that the examinations were rigorous
and met national standards. They considered that students were of a comparable level to other
similar programmes available. They were also confident that the students had been treated
equitably and fairly throughout the examination process.

16

Requirement 21: Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear criteria. The
standard expected of students in each area to be assessed must be clear and students
and staff involved in assessment must be aware of this standard. An appropriate
standard setting process must be employed for summative assessments. (Requirement
Partly Met)
The programme had clear guidance in terms of marking schemes and criteria. The examiners
were provided with a standard set of questions that could be asked during the case
presentations and a clear marking scheme with grade descriptors was used to determine
marks. A pre-examination meeting took place and ensured that all examiners and external
examiners were aware of their roles, the marking scheme was discussed and all examiners
were aware of how they would deal with discrepancies in marks between the two examiners.
Time was provided between each case presentation for the examiners to discuss their mark
allocations and determine a final mark for each student.
Written assessments are taken from an existing bank of examination questions, while new
questions are standard set, using programme staff, by discussing relevancy and difficulty of the
task/assessment. As mentioned in requirement 16, standard setting is limited due to the small
staff numbers. The programme should integrate further with other programmes which would
lead to more robust standard setting methods being used. The written assessments were all
double blind marked.
The programme also makes use of the external examiners to assess the standard of the
examination and are asked to provide feedback to the programme on the assessments in
advance of the examination taking place.
Actions
No
13, 14
& 15
13, 14
& 15

13, 14
& 15
16

16 &
21
17

Actions for the Provider
The provider must put in place more rigorous recording at the
start of the new academic year to ensure that better records of
student clinical logs are kept.
The provider must provide the GDC with documentation that
demonstrates evidence of the effective monitoring and individual
student attainment of a full range of clinical experiences,
alongside the clinical sign-up meeting minutes and assessment
blueprinting and mapping documentation.
The provider must update the GDC on how the implementation
of the new recording procedures have progressed.

Due date
Start of 2017
academic year
After sign-up
meeting for the
Hygiene
Examination

Annual
Monitoring
2017/2018
The provider must provide an update on how the update of the
Annual
mapping documentation for the final hygiene examination is
Monitoring
progressing.
2017/2018
The programmes should try to associate more closely with other Annual
programmes in order to adopt more robust standard setting
Monitoring
procedures as best practice.
2017/2018
The provider must provide an update on how the
Annual
plans/implementation of more formal patient feedback collection Monitoring
is progressing
2017/2018

17

Summary of Actions
Req.
Action
number

Observations

Due date

Response from Provider
1.1

7

Formal processes must be put in place to ensure that
all incidents are logged, actioned and disseminated
appropriately.

1.2

9

The provider must formalise the quality assurance
mechanisms at a programme level.

All clinical incidents are logged and actioned on a Trust
wide central database. The outcome from all clinical
incidents are disseminated firstly to the person(s) who
raised and logged the incident, and then at a quarterly
governance committee meeting. The membership of
this committee includes a Tutor Dental Hygienist from
the DCP School. We will ensure that the pertinent
issues from these meetings are discussed formally with
all teaching staff, and then disseminated to all students
with actions formally noted.
Last term the Hospital introduced a clinical briefing
session which takes place before the start of every
clinical session. This briefing ensures all staff and
students are aware of any relevant acute issues that
have arisen together with feedback from any previous
clinical incidences.
Risks and concerns to the programme are formally
registered and logged through the University Annual
Programme Review (APR) process.
The programme director is also a member of the
Schools Dental Education Committee where any
concerns around QA can be discussed more widely
with members of the Education Committee and Chair
of Dental Education.
In addition QA mechanisms are formally recorded at
Faculty level by the Faculty Quality Teams.

Annual Monitoring
2017/2018

Annual Monitoring
2017/2018

18

The programme also submits a return to the GDC as
part of their annual monitoring process.

1.3

11

The provider must ensure that there are mechanisms
in place to allow feedback being collected from
patients to be used to inform and develop the
programme.

13, 14 &
15

The provider must put in place more rigorous
recording at the start of the new academic year to
ensure that better records of student clinical logs are
kept.

13, 14 &
15

The provider must provide the GDC with
documentation that demonstrates evidence of the
effective monitoring and individual student attainment
of a full range of clinical experiences, alongside the
clinical sign-up meeting minutes and assessment
blueprinting and mapping documentation.
13, 14 & The provider must update the GDC on how the
15
implementation of the new recording procedures have
progressed.

The Dental School is looking at patient feedback across
both the BDS and Hygiene and Therapy programmes.
We are hoping to develop a patient participation group
which will enable patients to provide direct feedback
that can be used to enhance the programmes. We are
also engaging with patients and seeking their feedback
as part of the current BDS curriculum review, and the
as part of the submission of a new BSc programme in
Dental Hygiene and Therapy. We will ensure that the
patient feedback we collect from student’s clinical
sessions is formally considered at the Tutors annual
away day and used where appropriate to develop the
programme.
We have a designated dental nurse who has been
given protected time to undertake this duty. We are
also briefing the students at the beginning of each
term to remind them of their professional duty to
acutely record all their clinical activity from all clinical
sites. The log books will be closely scrutinised by the
tutors at the student’s termly progression meetings.

Annual Monitoring
2017/2018

The DCP school will ensure that all of the student’s
clinical experiences from across all sites are collated
onto one document, and that this document is mapped
to the sign up requirements for finals meeting. This
meeting will be formally recorded with the students.

After sign-up
meeting for the
Hygiene
Examination

Start of 2017
academic year

We will update the GDC on the new electronic Annual Monitoring
recording procedures as they come on board. The BDS 2017/2018
programme has recently introduced a new clinical
assessment feedback system (CAFS) which has been
19

16

The provider must provide an update on how the
update of the mapping documentation for the hygiene
examination is progressing.

rolled out to years 2, 3 and 4. It is anticipated CAFS will
come online for the new Hygiene and Therapy
programme in 2019.
Annual Monitoring
All assessments within the Diploma in Dental Hygiene
where mapped to the Preparing for Practice document 2017/2018
(all GDC LO). This was later updated when the
programme was submitted to the University
Programme Approval Group as a result of changes
regarding University regulation and the evolution of
South Bristol Community Hospital.
We individually blueprinted the final examination for
the Diploma, including all summative examinations in
the programme. This paperwork was made available
to the panel. The University also required an Intended
Learning Outcomes document which also covered this
programme.
Could the panel kindly clarify the following statement:
‘The blue printing documentation seen by the
inspectors for the hygienist examinations was not up
to date and some of the learning outcomes were not
being assessed where they said they were.’
We are very keen to know what part of the
documentation was not up to date and which learning
outcomes where not being assessed where we said
they were.

16 & 21

The programmes should try to associate more closely
with other programmes in order to adopt more robust
standard setting procedures as best practice.

The DCP staff have attended School wide teaching
meetings on standard setting, and as result of these
meetings, and given the small number of students

Annual Monitoring
2017/2018

20

17

The provider must provide an update on how the
plans/implementation of more formal patient feedback
collection is progressing

attached to the programme it was deemed our
standard setting was adequate for our examinations.
The Dental Hygiene students currently sit some
summative examinations alongside the dental
undergraduates; however, as we move forward
working on the new BSc programme together with the
BDS curriculum review that is currently taking place
we are looking at developing further joint
assessments which should help with standard setting.
We will provide the GDC with this information as the Annual Monitoring
2017/2018
work on this progresses.

21

Observations from the provider on content of report
None provided

Recommendations to the GDC
The inspectors recommend that this qualification continues to be approved for holders to apply for registration as a Dental Hygienist and Dental
Therapist with the General Dental Council.
The School must provide detailed information regarding how they have met, or are endeavouring to meet, the required actions set down in this
report in 2018.

Annex 1
Inspection purpose and process
1.

As part of its duty to protect patients and promote high standards within the professions it regulates, the General Dental Council (GDC)
quality assures the education and training of student dentists and dental care professionals (DCPs) at institutions whose qualifications
enable the holder to apply for registration with the GDC. It also quality assures new qualifications where it is intended that the qualification
will lead to registration. The aim of this quality assurance activity is to ensure that institutions produce a new registrant who has
demonstrated, on graduation, that they have met the learning outcomes required for registration with the GDC. This ensures that students
who obtain a qualification leading to registration are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner.

2.

Inspections are a key element of the GDC’s quality assurance activity. They enable a recommendation to be made to the Council of the
GDC regarding the ‘sufficiency’ of the programme for registration as a dentist and ‘approval’ of the programme for registration as a dental
care professional. The GDC’s powers are derived under Part II, Section 9 of the Dentists Act 1984 (as amended).

22

3.

The GDC document ‘Standards for Education’ 2nd edition1 is the framework used to evaluate qualifications. There are 21 Requirements in
three distinct Standards, against which each qualification is assessed.

4.

The education provider is requested to undertake a self-evaluation of the programme against the individual Requirements under the
Standards for Education. This involves stating whether each Requirement is ‘met’, ‘partly met’ or ‘not met’ and to provide evidence in
support of their evaluation. The inspection panel examines this evidence, may request further documentary evidence and gathers further
evidence from discussions with staff and students. The panel will reach a decision on each Requirement, using the following descriptors:

A Requirement is met if:
“There is sufficient appropriate evidence derived from the inspection process. This evidence provides the inspectors with broad confidence
that the provider demonstrates the Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students is supportive of documentary
evidence and the evidence is robust, consistent and not contradictory. There may be minor deficiencies in the evidence supplied but these are
likely to be inconsequential.”
A Requirement is partly met if:
“Evidence derived from the inspection process is either incomplete or lacks detail and, as such, fails to convince the inspection panel that the
provider fully demonstrates the Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students may not fully support the
evidence submitted or there may be contradictory information in the evidence provided. There is, however, some evidence of compliance and
it is likely that either (a) the appropriate evidence can be supplied in a short time frame, or, (b) any deficiencies identified can be addressed
and evidenced in the annual monitoring process.”
A Requirement is not met if
“The provider cannot provide evidence to demonstrate a Requirement or the evidence provided is not convincing. The information gathered at
the inspection through meetings with staff and students does not support the evidence provided or the evidence is inconsistent and/or
incompatible with other findings. The deficiencies identified are such as to give rise to serious concern and will require an immediate action
plan from the provider. The consequences of not meeting a Requirement in terms of the overall sufficiency of a programme will depend upon
the compliance of the provider across the range of Requirements and the possible implications for public protection”
5.

1

Inspection reports highlight areas of strength and draw attention to areas requiring improvement and development, including actions that
are required to be undertaken by the provider. Where an action is needed for a Requirement to be met, the term ‘must’ is used to describe
the obligation on the provider to undertake this action. For these actions the inspectors may stipulate a specific timescale by which the

http://www.gdc-uk.org/Aboutus/education/Documents/Standards%20for%20Education.pdf

23

action must be completed or when an update on progress must be provided. In their observations on the content of the report, the provider
should confirm the anticipated date by which these actions will be completed. Where an action would improve how a Requirement is met,
the term ‘should’ is used and for these actions there will be no due date stipulated. Providers will be asked to report on the progress in
addressing the required actions through the annual monitoring process. Serious concerns about a lack of progress may result in further
inspections or other quality assurance activity.
6.

The QA team aims to send an initial draft of the inspection report to the provider within two months of the conclusion of the inspection. The
provider of the qualification has the opportunity to provide factual corrections on the draft report. Following the production of the final report
the provider is asked to submit observations on, or objections to, the report and the actions listed. Where the inspection panel have
recommended that the programme is sufficient for registration, the Council of the GDC have delegated responsibility to the GDC Registrar
to consider the recommendations of the panel. Should an inspection panel not be able to recommend ‘sufficiency’ or ‘approval’, the report
and observations would be presented to the Council of the GDC for consideration.

7.

The final version of the report and the provider’s observations are published on the GDC website.

24

