INSPECTION REPORT
Education provider/ Awarding
Body:

University of Dundee

Programme/Award:

BSc Oral Health Sciences

Remit and purpose:

Full inspection referencing the Standards for
Education to determine approval of the award for
the purpose of registration with the GDC as a
dental hygienist/therapist

Learning Outcomes:

Preparing for Practice (Hygiene and therapy)

Programme inspection dates:

22 & 23 March 2016
15 April 2016 (Finals sign-up meeting)
16 & 17 May 2016

Examination inspection
dates:
Inspection panel:

Gail Mortimer (Chair and Lay Member)
Joanne Brindley (DCP Member)
David Young (Dentist Member)

GDC Staff:

Peter Butler

Outcome:

Recommended that the BSc continues to be
approved for the graduating cohort only to
register as dental hygienists/dental therapists,
pending a re-inspection of the programme in
February 2017

1

Full details of the inspection process can be found in the annex
Inspection summary
This programme benefits from a dedicated staff team that clearly want their students to
succeed and work hard to provide the best learning experience they can. The small cohort of
students each year benefit from easy access to their tutors and the opportunities for one to
one tuition this provides. Law and Ethics is embedded well throughout the programme and
the School is ahead of many other similar institutions in terms of the standard setting of
assessments. The Inspection Panel were pleased that all but one of the requirements for
Standard 1, covering patient safety, were fully met.
However, for the remaining two Standards, only one of the requirements was fully met, with
five requirements being not met at all and the rest only partly met. The inspectors identified
serious flaws in the following areas of the programme:
•
•
•

the recording of clinical experience;
low overall clinical experience numbers making breadth of experience hard to
establish;
a clinical milestones system not fit for purpose which could potentially allow students
to progress at a level below that of a safe beginner.

Background and overview of Qualification
Annual intake
Programme duration

10 students
Year 1 = 32 weeks
Year 2 = 35 weeks
Year 3 = 35 weeks

Format of programme

Year 1
Foundation: lectures, seminars, practicals,
online modules
Restorative 1: lectures, seminars, Clinical
skills practical sessions
Biomedical Sciences & Oral Biology:
lectures, seminars, practicals
Plaque-related Diseases: lectures,
seminars, practicals
Clinical Practice 1: lectures, seminars,
online modules, clinical sessions,
shadowing the BSc2 students in
Periodontal clinics
Year 2
Restorative 2: lectures, seminars, Clinical
skills practical sessions
Human Disease: lectures, seminars,
practicals
Imaging: lectures, practicals
Behavioural Sciences: lectures, seminars
2

Clinical Practice 2: seminars, clinical
sessions, shadowing the BSc3 students in
Restorative clinics & Paeds clinics and
shadowing in Dental A&E

Year 3
The Developing Dentition: lectures,
seminars, Clinical skills practical sessions
The Therapist and the Community:
lectures, seminars
Clinical Practice 3: lectures, seminars,
clinical sessions, Outreach placements,
shadowing in Restorative Consultant
clinics, Dental A&E and Oral Medicine
clinics
The panel wishes to thank the staff, students, and external stakeholders involved with the
BSc Oral Health Sciences programme for their co-operation and assistance with the
inspection.

3

Standard 1 – Protecting patients
Providers must be aware of their duty to protect the public. Providers must ensure that
patient safety is paramount and care of patients is of an appropriate standard. Any risk
to the safety of patients and their care by students must be minimised.
Requirements
Met
Partly Not
met
met
1. Students must provide patient care only when they have
demonstrated adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical
✓
procedures, the student should be assessed as competent in
the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients.

2. Providers must have systems in place to inform patients that
they may be treated by students and the possible implications
of this. Patient agreement to treatment by a student must be
obtained and recorded prior to treatment commencing.

✓
✓

3. Students must only provide patient care in an environment
which is safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with
relevant legislation and requirements regarding patient care,
including equality and diversity, wherever treatment takes
place.

✓

4. When providing patient care and services, providers must
ensure that students are supervised appropriately according to
the activity and the student’s stage of development.

✓

5. Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained.
This should include training in equality and diversity
legislation relevant for the role. Clinical supervisors must
have appropriate general or specialist registration with a
UK regulatory body.

✓

6. Providers must ensure that students and all those involved in
the delivery of education and training are aware of their
obligation to raise concerns if they identify any risks to patient
safety and the need for candour when things go wrong.
Providers should publish policies so that it is clear to all
parities how concerns will be raised and how these concerns
will be acted upon. Providers must support those who do raise
concerns and provide assurance that staff and students will
not be penalised for doing so.

✓

7. Systems must be in place to identify and record issues that may
affect patient safety. Should a patient safety issue arise,
appropriate action must be taken by the provider and where
necessary the relevant regulatory body should be notified.

✓

8. Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and
apply as required. The content and significance of the student
fitness to practise procedures must be conveyed to students
and aligned to GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance.

✓

4

Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be
familiar with the GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance.
Providers must also ensure that the GDC’s Standards for the
Dental Team are embedded within student training.

Requirement 1: Students must provide patient care only when they have demonstrated
adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical procedures, the student should be
assessed as competent in the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients. (Requirement Partly Met)
Applicants to the programme are subject to a process of multiple-mini interviews designed to
assess their suitability for the programme and for the wider dental profession.
Assessment of a student’s professionalism takes place throughout the curriculum and all
clinical work, using a ‘lapse of professionalism’ system. This system includes penalties for
potential breaches of patient safety.
Grading students in the pre-clinical environment is calibrated on a daily basis to ensure
consistency of approach and to ensure the identification of weaker candidates. When students
need additional support, discussions will take place with the Programme Lead in order to
ascertain what type of support will be required. This might include referral to University student
support services. Failing students will routinely receive further training and/or tuition.
Students must complete a ‘gateway assessment’ prior to commencing treatment on real
patients. Students who spoke with the panel explained that the pre-clinical experience they
gained prepared them well for these assessments. They valued working in pairs and
undertaking role-play tasks prior to working on phantom heads and on clinics with real patients
as this helped to boost their confidence and helped them to understand better the patient
experience. An example of an assessment in Year One involves demonstrating they are able
to use instruments safely and can apply a temporary dressing. In Year Two, they might be
required to cut and fill a class II cavity. The inspectors were pleased to learn that an External
Examiner will be present whenever students are required to re-sit their gateway examinations;
staff were keen to assure the panel that a student would not be able to make it through the
process if they were not ready to do so.
The inspectors found, however, that the pre-clinical course for paediatric dentistry was not
robust enough. The work undertaken by students in this area is inadequately recorded and it
is therefore not possible for staff to monitor students’ ability and progress effectively. Given the
low number of child patients seen by students during the programme, there needs to be a
robust assessment of students’ skills in this area. The inspectors would like to see the
introduction of more rigorous recording of student experience in paediatric dentistry.
Requirement 2: Providers must have systems in place to inform patients that they may
be treated by students and the possible implications of this. Patient agreement to
treatment by a student must be obtained and recorded prior to treatment commencing.
(Requirement Met)
Clinical environments display clear information regarding treatment by students. This
includes information leaflets, notices, name badges and uniforms that clearly identify
students. Patients are given full information prior to treatment commencing and receive a
verbal introduction from students on clinics. The need for a patient to give informed consent
to treatment is taught from the very early stages of the programme in the foundation module.
5

The need to gain written consent is also included in all outreach treatment plans. Consent is
not always recorded for each treatment session depending on the work being undertaken
and the fluidity of the individual treatment plan. Work is being undertaken by staff to address
this.
Requirement 3: Students must only provide patient care in an environment which is
safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with relevant legislation and
requirements regarding patient care, including equality and diversity, wherever
treatment takes place. (Requirement Met)
Clinical inductions are carried out both within the dental school and in all outreach locations.
These cover cross infection control, handwashing, decontamination procedures and waste
management. There are group ‘huddles’ before each clinical session commences and
these are used to disseminate updated information or to highlight particular issues.
Information is also available to students via the Virtual Learning Environment (VLE). This
includes online learning modules covering important equality and diversity issues.
There is a decontamination training facility which is used for the cleanliness champion
programme (a scheme which encourages students to develop their knowledge and skills in
relation to patient safety and to act as role models within their team). Students are
assessed formatively through their logbooks and via a summative assessment at the
conclusion of the unit. A training video is being developed which covers the safe handling of
sharps.
There are clear dental school and NHS health and safety policies in place and these were
provided as part of the pre-inspection evidence. The NHS policies apply to both the school and
outreach settings.
Qlikview – a web-based dashboard tool – updates daily with clinical incident data collected via
Datix (patient safety and risk management software) and this can be used as a performance
management tool as well as for clinical governance and risk monitoring. The aim is that the
continued use of this system will help to ensure that students are provided with the most
effective environment in which to develop their knowledge and skills.
There are modules throughout the programme which cover issues relating to equality and
diversity. Law, ethics and professionalism is embedded in the foundation module at the start of
the programme and there is a specific professionalism module in the final year.
Requirement 4: When providing patient care and services, providers must ensure that
students are supervised appropriately according to the activity and the student’s stage
of development. (Requirement Met)
Supervision levels appear to be in line with other similar institutions and, on clinics, the ratio of
staff to students is normally 1:3 or 1:4 but never more than 1:5. In the case of staff shortages
clinics are reduced or cancelled to ensure patient safety. Normally two nurses work alongside
five students. Where nursing support is not available, students will work in pairs to support one
another. In outreach, students are supervised by a range of tutors with a mix of appropriate
skills to ensure patient safety is maintained. Regular staff meetings help to disseminate
learning points and the sharing of ways of achieving clinical effectiveness.
Students also get nursing support in outreach but, in common with other similar institutions,
this can be variable. Students feel the small cohort size is a real benefit as it provides the
opportunity for significant one-to-one time with their personal tutors. They did not report any
issues with the level of supervision they receive.
6

Requirement 5: Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained. This should
include training in equality and diversity legislation relevant for the role. Clinical
supervisors must have appropriate general or specialist registration with a UK
regulatory body. (Requirement Met)
New staff, both within the dental hospital and in outreach locations, are provided with
information and training in the clinical assessment system operated by the programme. There
is also an NHS induction programme for new starters. The induction process covers all
policies that staff need to be familiar with. There are annual training days for staff and those
working in outreach are also encouraged (but not obliged) to attend. 92% of staff attended the
most recent session.
The School has introduced peer review of teaching for the purposes of calibration. Themes to
be addressed via the peer review system are identified through this process. All staff have
completed, or are registered to complete, a qualification in education. The NHS Education for
Scotland (NES) START Learning and Teaching programme is available for supervisors in
outreach. All staff have had training in equality and diversity issues and evidence of this was
provided to the inspection team during the inspection.
Requirement 6: Providers must ensure that students and all those involved in the
delivery of education and training are aware of their obligation to raise concerns if they
identify any risks to patient safety and the need for candour when things go wrong.
Providers should publish policies so that it is clear to all parties how concerns should
be raised and how these concerns will be acted upon. Providers must support those
who do raise concerns and provide assurance that staff and students will not be
penalised for doing so. (Requirement Met)
The School has a raising concerns policy in place and this contains a statement on students’
responsibility to voice concerns regarding any potential risks to patient safety they may
identify. This policy is available to students via both the VLE and the course handbook.
Raising concerns is covered at several points during the programme and students are taught
the importance of not hiding errors from patients when things go wrong. The school
acknowledge that it can be difficult to raise concerns with such a small cohort of students. To
tackle this, tutors try to use personal examples of when they themselves have needed to raise
an issue to demonstrate the need for candour. The policy also sets out the School process for
handling a concern so that students are aware of what action will be taken should they raise
an issue.
All staff involved in the delivery of the programme are registered with the GDC and, as such,
have familiarity with the GDC’s ‘Standards for the Dental Team’ and the expectation that they
should raise a concern if patient safety is put at risk.
Students felt the importance of the need to raise concerns was particularly well covered during
Year One. They also found the Law and Ethics module extremely useful.
Requirement 7: Systems must be in place to identify and record issues that may affect
patient safety. Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be taken by
the provider and where necessary the relevant regulatory body should be notified.
(Requirement Met)
Clinical incidents are reported through the Datix system. Where incidents do occur, an incident
review is required to be undertaken. The School use data collected from the system to inform
future learning and to monitor aspects of potential risk within the programme. In advance of
the inspection, the panel were provided with documentation showing the recording of
information relating to clinical incidents and how these were dealt with and resolved.
7

‘Lapse of Professionalism’ points are given to students if their behaviour fails to meet the
required standard. The criteria includes tariffs for actions that may compromise patient safety.
Any significant safety issue that is identified will be reported as appropriate to the University
Head of Safety Services and/or NHS Safety, Clinical Governance & Risk Committees. An
appropriate course of action can then be agreed upon.
The School’s Professionalism & Capability Committee considers cases of student
misconduct/poor performance, including patient safety issues and will refer a student to a full
Fitness to Practise (FtP) hearing, if appropriate.
Hand hygiene audits take place on a regular basis and all students are required to have
occupational health clearance prior to treating patients on clinic.
Requirement 8: Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and apply as
required. The content and significance of the student fitness to practise procedures
must be conveyed to students and aligned to GDC Student Fitness to Practise
Guidance. Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar with the
GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance. Providers must also ensure that the GDC’s
Standard for the Dental Team are embedded within student training. (Requirement Met)
A revised Dental School Fitness to Practise policy and procedure came into force for the 201213 academic year. The policy and procedure is available to all students via the VLE. The
Professionalism and Capability Committee was introduced as part of this policy and considers
whether cases meet the threshold for a full FtP hearing. There have been specific training
days for staff covering the FtP procedures and these continue to be highlighted during away
days and at other training opportunities.
As described under Requirement 7, ‘Lapse of Professionalism’ points are given to students
whose levels of behaviour or performance fall below the expected standard. The School
Manager makes the decision, at arm’s length, regarding the number of points that should be
issued.
A student is referred to the Professionalism and Capability Committee if they obtain seven
‘Lapse of Professionalism’ points in one year. The Committee makes the decision as to
whether the case is serious enough to warrant a full FtP panel hearing.
Information about FtP is accessible through the student handbook and VLE. Students are
provided with more detailed information relating to the School’s FtP processes through
teaching around Law and Ethics. For example, one piece of work students are required to
complete involves them considering anonymised details from a GDC FtP case; students then
provide a written justification for the sanction applied. In general, though, students met by the
panel appeared to have only a minimal understanding of the FtP processes in place at the
School. However, they did know how to access relevant information should they require it.
Actions
No
Actions for the Provider
1
The School must introduce a more rigorous pre-clinical paediatric
course to include recording of experience.
2
Work should continue to address differences in the recording of
patient consent.
8
The School should consider ways to improve students’
understanding of FtP processes and procedures.

Due date

8

Standard 2 – Quality evaluation and review of the programme
The provider must have in place effective policy and procedures for the monitoring and
review of the programme.
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
9. The provider must have a framework in place that details how
✓
it manages the quality of the programme which includes
making appropriate changes to ensure the curriculum
continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and
adapts to changing legislation and external guidance. There
must be a clear statement about where responsibility lies for
this function.

10. Any concerns identified through the Quality Management
framework, including internal and external reports relating to
quality, must be addressed as soon as possible and the GDC
notified of serious threats to students achieving the learning
outcomes.

✓
✓
✓

11. Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external
quality assurance procedures. External quality assurance
should include the use of external examiners, who should be
familiar with the GDC learning outcomes and their context
and QAA guidelines should be followed where applicable.
Patient and/or customer feedback must be collected and
used to inform programme development.
12. The provider must have effective systems in place to quality
assure placements where students deliver treatment to
ensure that patient care and student assessment across all
locations meets these Standards. The quality assurance
systems should include the regular collection of student and
patient feedback relating to placements.

✓

✓

GDC comments
Requirement 9: The provider must have a framework in place that details how it
manages the quality of the programme which includes making appropriate changes to
ensure the curriculum continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and adapts
to changing legislation and external guidance. There must be a clear statement about
where responsibility lies for this function. (Requirement Partly Met)
The University has undertaken a major restructure involving the dental school; this took effect
in August 2015 and resulted in a transition from four colleges comprising 15 schools to nine
independent schools of which dentistry is one. The inspectors were pleased to learn that this
major change did not lead to any disruption of the day-to-day running of the programme. Staff
reported that communication lines had been shortened as a direct result of the restructuring
exercise; the School now reports directly to the University rather than via a college as was the
9

case previously. Staff view this as an extremely positive change as they have the perception of
being given an independent and unedited voice within the University structure.
There is now an Associate Dean for Quality and Academic Standards (ADQAS) and this has
proved to be an enormous benefit to the school. There is a clearer committee structure, which
was provided as part of the pre-inspection submission. It will be of interest to the inspectors to
see how the improved Committee structure and lines of communication impact on the
development of the programme in future.
Issues regarding the curriculum, or changes to it, can be raised through the BSc Management
Group, which then feeds in to the Learning and Teaching Committee structure.
Students are able to provide feedback – positive or negative – regarding their experiences on
the programme via anonymous questionnaires at the end of each semester. Outreach tutors
are able to provide feedback and input into the development of the programme through the
annual training day. This is in addition to the general day-to-day dialogue they have with the
School regarding feedback, constructive criticism and possible changes.
This requirement has been judged to have been only partly met due to the poor quality of the
blueprinting of assessments within the programme against the GDC learning outcomes. There
is a clear over-reliance on continuous assessment and review of students’ logbooks in order to
ascertain whether learning outcomes have been achieved; this leads to a lack of detail in how
the programme ensures that students are meeting the learning outcomes. The inspectors
formed the view that the student logbooks lacked detail and, in many cases, were
inadequately completed; the logbooks could not, therefore, be sufficiently relied upon as
evidence that the learning outcomes had been met.
Requirement 10: Any concerns identified through the Quality Management framework,
including internal and external reports relating to quality, must be addressed as soon
as possible and the GDC notified of serious threats to students achieving the learning
outcomes. The provider will have systems in place to quality assure placements.
(Requirement Partly Met)
The inspectors judged this requirement to have been only partly met. This was despite the
clear improvements to quality management mechanisms made in response to previous GDC
reports relating to the Bachelor of Dental Surgery (BDS) programme delivered at Dundee
Dental School. These reports are available on the GDC website.
During a scrutiny of relevant documentation, the inspectors identified serious issues relating to
the students’ lack of clinical experience and the inadequate and flawed recording of this
experience. It was the view of the inspectors that an effective and robust quality management
framework should and would have identified these issues. As such, further work must be
carried out to address this concern and to ensure such shortcomings do not go undetected in
future.
The School undertakes an annual programme quality enhancement review and a report is
produced which includes findings regarding the outcome of module reviews and data
regarding student progression. Any potential threats to the programme are reported and
escalated via the School committee structure.
Requirement 11: Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external quality
assurance procedures. External quality assurance should include the use of external
examiners, who should be familiar with the GDC learning outcomes and their context
and QAA guidelines should be followed where applicable. Patient and/or customer
10

feedback must be collected and used to inform programme development. (Requirement
Not Met)
External Examiners provide annual reports on assessment processes within the School.
These are considered by senior staff Year Leads, the ADQAS, Programme Leads and the
University’s Director of Quality Assurance. The reports contribute to the annual monitoring
reports for each year where required actions are agreed and listed.
Should a report submitted by an External Examiner indicate there are serious issues to be
addressed, the ADQAS will speak directly to the External Examiner and the matter may also
be escalated to the Vice Principal of the University. The School’s policy is for there to be a
direct dialogue with External Examiners and this means the school has a responsibility to
communicate effectively with them.
The External Examiners told the panel that they had looked at all student logbooks and had
examined their clinical experience and concluded that these showed the students had carried
out adequate levels of work. This directly contradicted what the inspectors had uncovered
during a thorough examination of the relevant clinical data provided by the School. The panel
were concerned by the level of scrutiny the External Examiners are allowed by the School and,
as such, how rigorous the quality assurance of the programme truly is.
Similarly, staff at the School did not seem aware of very serious discrepancies in paperwork
uncovered by the inspectors and the impact these discrepancies had on students’ eligibility to
progress through the programme to finals. This was a matter of serious concern since data
used at the meeting to agree all students had achieved the prerequisites to progress to finals
was, in actual fact, incorrect. Without accurate paperwork, External Examiners are also unable
to establish a true picture of the programmes ability achieve clinical and academic outcomes.
The School must take immediate steps to ensure that all necessary paperwork is correct.
External Examiners are involved with the examining of students and this has long been an
element of the programme. Given the small size of the cohort the External Examiners provide
an external form of assessment. However, this means that they are unable to carry out an
overall QA role as recommended by the QAA.
Requirement 12: The provider must have effective systems in place to quality assure
placements where students deliver treatment to ensure that patient care and student
assessment across all locations meets these Standards. The quality assurance systems
should include the regular collection of student and patient feedback relating to
placements. (Requirement Partly Met)
The BSc programme makes use of three of the 16 available Scottish outreach locations which
are arranged and quality-managed by NHS Education for Scotland (NES). Service level
agreements are in place and cover required chair numbers and patient demographics.
There is an annual training day for all outreach tutors and the lead member of staff for the final
year of the BSc visits all outreach locations to look at grading by tutors in an effort to maintain
consistency of approach to grading and calibration. Induction processes can differ slightly
across locations but much of the induction received by students when they go out to outreach
locations is standardised. Students are also required to sign a checklist to show they have
received the relevant information regarding medical emergency procedures, dress codes, and
raising concerns.
There was clear evidence that some paperwork included in students’ logbooks had been
completed incorrectly in outreach locations. Data collected in outreach did not seem to match
data recorded as part of the students’ achievement of clinical milestones which are an
11

important and integral part of a student’s progress to the final examinations. Staff within the
School were not able to provide the assurance that students’ records depicted what they had
actually undertaken clinically.

Actions
No
9
9
10, 11,
14
10

11,
20
12

Actions for the Provider
Blueprinting of assessments must be improved.
The use of student logbooks must be reviewed.
Monitoring of clinical experience data must be reviewed and
improved.
The School must ensure that quality management systems pick
up issues that may threaten students’ ability to achieve the GDC
learning outcomes at an early stage.
The contribution to the programme by external examiners must
be reviewed to ensure they can carry out an effective QA role.
The School must ensure the integrity of clinical experience data
collected in outreach settings.

Due date

12

Standard 3– Student assessment
Assessment must be reliable and valid. The choice of assessment method must be
appropriate to demonstrate achievement of the GDC learning outcomes. Assessors
must be fit to perform the assessment task.
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
13. To award the qualification, providers must be assured that
students have demonstrated attainment across the full range
✓
of learning outcomes, and that they are fit to practise at the
level of a safe beginner. Evidence must be provided that
demonstrates this assurance, which should be supported by
a coherent approach to the principles of assessment referred
to in these standards.
14. The provider must have in place management systems to
plan, monitor and centrally record the assessment of
students, including the monitoring of clinical and/or technical
experience, throughout the programme against each of the
learning outcomes.

✓

15. Students must have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients and procedures and should undertake each activity
relating to patient care on sufficient occasions to enable them
to develop the skills and the level of competency to achieve
the relevant learning outcomes.

✓

16. Providers must demonstrate that assessments are fit for
purpose and deliver results which are valid and reliable. The
methods of assessment used must be appropriate to the
learning outcomes, in line with current and best practice and
be routinely monitored, quality assured and developed.

✓

17. Assessment must utilise feedback collected from a variety of
sources, which should include other members of the dental
team, peers, patients and/or customers.

✓

18. The provider must support students to improve their
performance by providing regular feedback and by
encouraging students to reflect on their practice.

19. Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills,
experience and training to undertake the task of assessment,
including appropriate general or specialist registration with a
UK regulatory body. Examiners/assessors should have
received training in equality and diversity relevant for their
role.
20. Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent
to which assessment processes are rigorous, set at the
correct standard, ensure equity of treatment for students and
have been fairly conducted. The responsibilities of the
external examiners must be clearly documented.

✓
✓
✓
✓

✓

✓
13

21. Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear
criteria. The standard expected of students in each area
to be assessed must be clear and students and staff
involved in assessment must be aware of this standard.
An appropriate standard setting process must be
employed for summative assessments.

✓
✓

GDC comments
Requirement 13: To award the qualification, providers must be assured that students
have demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes, and that they
are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner. Evidence must be provided that
demonstrates this assurance, which should be supported by a coherent approach to the
principles of assessment referred to in these standards. (Requirement Partly Met)
There are some good opportunities for BSc students to work with BDS students and this
includes in outreach. Students appreciated this opportunity and felt it was particularly beneficial
in giving dentistry students a clearer idea of the role and scope of practice of a
hygienist/therapist.
Unfortunately, the blueprinting documentation presented to the inspection team was
inadequate. As previously noted in this report (see Requirement 9), there is a tendency to rely
on student logbooks as a method of assessing the achievement of learning outcomes.
However, the panel found that these include scant detail and limited recording of feedback and
reflection. It was unclear to the panel how the logbooks could assure staff at the School that
the learning outcomes linked to them had been achieved. There needs to be a much more
robust approach to mapping and blueprinting assessments. This could be achieved through a
full review of the curriculum.
The inspectors judged the clinical milestones each student is required to achieve throughout
the duration of the programme to be unfit for purpose. These need urgent review. The criteria
provided as part of the inspection showed that students were able to complete their milestones
without achieving the level of a safe beginner in all treatments areas. The inspectors formed
the view that, in the long term, this would be unacceptable. Coupled with this, the
inconsistencies in the recording of clinical data - particularly in relation to paediatric dentistry was of such concern that the school was required to refrain from issuing examination results
until additional evidence could be provided to assure the inspection panel that the milestones
relating to the treatment of child patients had, in fact, been achieved.
Requirement 14: The provider must have in place management systems to plan, monitor
and centrally record the assessment of students, including the monitoring of clinical
and/or technical experience, throughout the programme against each of the learning
outcomes. (Requirement Not Met)
The new QA system has been in place for a relatively short amount of time and, as such, it
was not possible for the School to provide the inspectors with a worked example of how an
issue has been resolved via the new system. The inspectors wish to see evidence of this when
it becomes available to be assured that important issues are dealt with and the required
actions are taken forward in a timely manner.
The issue of a lack of paediatric patients appears to first have been raised by staff via the
Management Group and was escalated to the Learning and Teaching Committee. Students
14

are happy to approach staff when they have concerns about their clinical experience. However,
it was the view of the panel that the School should not rely on students coming forward with
concerns over a lack of clinical experience and that more rigorous and regular monitoring of
their progress in this area is needed.
The NHS Clinical Practice Committee also identified the lack of paediatric patients as an issue.
Changes in referral pathways through discussions with local practitioners have been
recognised as a useful method of tackling the problem.
The implementation of the Longitudinal Integrative Foundation Training Undergraduate to
Postgraduate Pathway (LiftUpp) system, which is currently being rolled out across the School,
should allow for a greater level of complexity in the recording of clinical data and general
information about clinical experience. Staff repeatedly told the inspectors that LiftUpp would
negate the issues with the recording of clinical experience data that the inspectors had
discovered. The inspectors will require evidence that the data relating to clinical experience
and clinical milestones has greater integrity going forward.
Requirement 15: Students must have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and should undertake each activity relating to patient care on
sufficient occasions to enable them to develop the skills and the level of competency to
achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes. (Requirement Not Met)
As noted previously within this report, the inspectors had serious concerns about the record
keeping within the school and the levels of clinical experience students were gaining exposure
to during the programme.
The panel recognise that the collation of data relating to clinical experience for the current
cohort was difficult and this, in part, had led to discrepancies. At the time of the inspection,
data was collected in various locations rather than one central site. The School is implementing
the Liftupp programme that utilises iPads to capture clinical data in one location. All future
cohorts will be using the new system. The School gave assurance that this new system would
resolve issues around the amount of detail and the level of complexity of the data recorded.
The breadth of student experience is mainly assessed via the clinical milestones students are
expected to achieve during each year of the programme. However, in some cases, the
milestones are extremely low. Even so, students were clearly finding it difficult to reach their
milestones and, whilst the milestones do cover a range of treatment modalities, students were
not being exposed to enough cases to gain sufficient breadth of experience. The inspection
team also formed the view that too much reliance is placed on students informing staff that
there are specific treatments types they have not had enough experience of.
Students reported that they are able to see how they are progressing through the programme
as they are graded after each clinical procedure. They felt they had enough clinical experience
but the panel were not convinced they truly believed this, especially as many of the final year
students did not appear to know what their clinical milestone targets were.
Outreach tutors told the inspection panel that they could be an effective means of sourcing
additional and differing patient types according to the needs of students on the programme.
This avenue needs to be explored and utilised further.
Requirement 16: Providers must demonstrate that assessments are fit for purpose and
deliver results, which are valid and reliable. The methods of assessment used must be
appropriate to the learning outcomes, in line with current and best practice and be
routinely monitored, quality assured and developed. (Requirement Partly Met)
15

An overarching review of assessments took place on 2011 and the purpose of this review was
to ensure that appropriate methods of assessment are utilised at appropriate points in the
programme.
There is an ongoing review of assessment within the School both internally and in consultation
with External Examiners. This has resulted in several developments to degree examinations,
most notably the introduction of standard setting in all years.
As noted elsewhere in this report, the inspection panel felt there was a general over-reliance
on assessing learning outcomes via the student logbooks that do not contain information that is
sufficiently reliable upon which to make such decisions. The logbook requires significant
development in order for it to be fit for purpose. As previously noted, a more detailed
blueprinting of assessments is required to ensure all Learning Outcomes are achieved.
The inspection team attended the case presentation element of the final examination process.
Each student presents two cases, usually one restorative case and one periodontal case.
Students are given five minutes to present each case and are then questioned for ten minutes
per case. There are set topics which each student will be questioned on. The examination is
not recorded and each examiner takes notes while the other is questioning the candidate. The
inspectors agreed the School must consider having a third member of staff at each case
presentation to act as scribe or to consider recording the examination, which would allow
capture of the assessment in the event of a complaint or appeal, and would also an opportunity
for an unsuccessful student to listen to their recording and help to identify areas to strengthen
as part of a remedial action plan.
Students must also complete a two-hour written examination and have successfully achieved
their Year Three clinical milestones as part of their finals. As previously noted, the clinical
milestones and accompanying criteria need to be revised to ensure they are an appropriate
barrier to reaching finals.
Requirement 17: Assessment must utilise feedback collected from a variety of sources,
which should include other members of the dental team, peers, patients and/or
customers. (Requirement Partly Met)
A patient survey takes place each year in outreach. This feeds into the quality assurance
process and is incorporated into the outreach annual report.
Supervising staff may also ask for the patient’s feedback on how the student treatment
experience was for them and this may influence the grade awarded to the students.
There is peer observation in some clinical areas, for example in the Paediatric, Periodontology
and Integrated Oral Care clinics where students in the year below observe more experienced
students to prepare them for when they are new to each clinical environment.
More robust methods of utilising feedback as part of the student progression through the
programme need to be investigated and implemented.
Requirement 18: The provider must support students to improve their performance by
providing regular feedback and by encouraging students to reflect on their practice.
(Requirement Not Met)
The inspectors were not able to form a view that students were being encouraged to develop
their own Personal Development Plan (PDP). The current method of capturing clinical data
does not allow for insight into a student’s level of ability. This lack of insight coupled with a
16

deficit in reflective learning means a meaningful PDP cannot be produced. The panel formed
the view that this is an area of the programme which should be developed and enhanced.
Evidence provided prior to the inspection suggested that logbooks are the basis for students’
reflection on their performance during the programme. The panel were told that students are
required to complete a reflective log section in their logbooks at the end of each clinical
session which forms the basis of discussions with clinical tutors and with Year Leads at
Progress Meetings. The inspectors found, however, that these reflective logs were wholly
inadequate for this task. In most cases, students had recorded little in the way of useful
reflection and the panel could not see how these logs could form the basis of any useful
discussions about performance. Staff stated that students are actively encouraged to reflect on
their performance but that there are no specific lectures or tutorials for students regarding how
to become a reflective practitioner. Further guidance on reflection would, therefore, be
beneficial.
Feedback is used formatively, rather than summatively, throughout the programme. The
School believes that using feedback summatively is difficult to achieve. Feedback is given to
students after each clinical procedure has been completed. This is given verbally and should
also be recorded in logbooks. Students are also encouraged to meet regularly with their
mentor or personal tutor in order to discuss their performance as the programme progresses.
The inspectors agreed that it would be beneficial if these discussions were recorded in detail in
students’ reflective logs.
Feedback on written and practical assessments is given in written form and will be discussed
at Progress Meetings. Any student who is graded as borderline or failing will be invited to a
meeting with their Year Lead and the Programme Lead to discuss the reasons for their poor
performance and to establish means of providing support to these students. This might include
extra tuition or revision advice.
Liftupp is to be used to record all student feedback for future cohorts and students will only be
able to sign off from clinic on their iPad once they confirm they have received feedback on their
performance. The current final year students were recording feedback on paper.
A new patient feedback scheme was piloted and this employed the use of optical recognition
software. Feedback is sought from all patients to prevent students from ‘cherry-picking’ their
most favourable patients. Work is required to be undertaken to look at how students will use
the feedback they receive from patients. It is thought that feedback may instigate remediation
for students where it indicates a need for improvement in certain aspects of their training.
Requirement 19: Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills, experience and
training to undertake the task of assessment, including appropriate general or specialist
registration with a UK regulatory body. Examiners/ assessors should have received
training in equality and diversity relevant for their role. (Requirement Met)
Staff involved in the examining of students will only examine within the appropriate scope of
practice. New members of the examining team shadow more experienced examiners before
they commence independent examining. All staff complete the University Learning and
Teaching Certificate programme and this includes modules covering assessments.
Evidence was provided in the inspectors’ base room to show staff completion of equality and
diversity training.
Examination scripts are blind double marked. Examiners then meet to discuss and agree final
marks. If there are major differences in grading, then model answers are scrutinised and there
17

are discussions around interpretation issues. Staff reported that the grades awarded by
examiners are generally in line which would indicate that staff calibration works well.
Various methods of attempting to standardise examiners have been attempted along with
procedures for identifying outliers. It is hoped that Liftupp will assist with monitoring the grading
by examiners on clinics once full roll-out of the system is complete. This should identify areas
where there is a need for any further calibration.
Outreach tutors met by the panel said they felt well supported by the school in terms of
ensuring they are grading fairly and consistently. Staff from the school visit the outreach
centres to look at how tutors are marking and to go through calibration exercises. There is also
an annual, obligatory training day.
Requirement 20: Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent to which
assessment processes are rigorous, set at the correct standard, ensure equity of
treatment for students and have been fairly conducted. The responsibilities of the
external examiners must be clearly documented. (Requirement Partly Met)
The School carefully considers reports provided by External Examiners and reacts as
appropriate. Feedback from external examiners forms part of the annual quality assurance
mechanisms. In previous years, the School would wait until the following examination diet to
report back to external examiners regarding changes made as a result of their report
recommendations. Now, the School writes to the external examiner straight away in order to
explain any actions that have been undertaken.
External Examiners can give immediate verbal comment to meetings of the Examination
Boards, where they also may comment on changes made in line with any previous report
recommendations.
As previously noted, the panel were unclear as to the level of scrutiny afforded to External
Examiners since they came to very different conclusions regarding the clinical readiness of the
graduating cohort to the inspection panel. The School must encourage external examiners to
fulfil a more rigorous quality assurance mechanism for the programme.
Requirement 21: Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear criteria. The
standard expected of students in each area to be assessed must be clear and students
and staff involved in assessment must be aware of this standard. An appropriate
standard setting process must be employed for summative assessments. (Requirement
Partly Met)
Examination regulations are published and are sent to students at the beginning of each
academic year. These describe eligibility criteria, the structure of the examination,
arrangements for resits and the criteria for achieving a distinction. The panel was told that
students often have several questions regarding Objective Structured Clinical Examinations
(OSCEs) as this is often an unfamiliar assessment format to them. For some assessment
types, there are online examples that students can access and there are seminars that provide
students with example questions.
Students who met with the inspectors did not demonstrate a thorough understanding of the
clinical milestones they are expected to achieve in order to progress through the programme.
The students told the inspectors that they would welcome more guidance around the grading
system.
Standard setting has now been adopted for all summative examinations within the School
using the Angoff method.
18

For individual students specific arrangements for examinations are put in place in line with
recommendations received from the University’s Disability Services. This has previously
included the use of orthopaedic chairs in lectures and assessments, as well as the provision of
extra time to complete assessments.
Actions
No
13
14
10, 11,
14
15
15
16
16
17
18

20, 11
21

Actions for the Provider
Clinical milestones must be urgently reviewed to ensure they
are an appropriate barrier to progress.
The School must demonstrate that the QA system deals with
potential issues in a timely manner.
Monitoring of clinical experience must be reviewed and
improved.
The School must investigate methods of increasing access to
patients, particularly paediatric patients as a matter of urgency.
The School must show LitfUpp is providing an increased level of
certainty in relation to clinical experience data.
Assessments must be reviewed to reduce the over-reliance on
evaluation of logbooks.
The School should consider use of a scribe or the recording of
case presentation examinations.
School must investigate methods of incorporating patient
feedback into assessment.
The School must improve reflective learning opportunities to
include enhanced teaching and recording of reflection. This
should include detailed recording of progress discussions with
personal tutors.
The contribution to the programme by external examiners must
be reviewed to ensure they can carry out an effective QA role.
Guidance for students on the grading schemes used must be
improved.

Due date

19

Summary of Actions
Req.
number

Action

Observations

Due date

Response from Provider
1.1

1

The School must introduce a more rigorous preclinical paediatric course to include recording of
experience.

1.2

2

Work should continue to address differences in the
recording of patient consent.

8

The School should consider ways to improve
students’ understanding of FtP processes and
procedures.

Pre-clinical Paediatric Dentistry course ran in September 2016
September 2016 and culminated in a competency
based assessment prior to starting Paediatric
Dentistry clinics. Students were assessed on: a
conventional restoration in a primary tooth, two
stainless steel crowns (one conventional
preparation / one Hall Technique) and pulp therapy
in a primary tooth (pulpotomy, desensitising pulp
therapy and pulpectomy). This has been double
marked and recorded on paper.
September 2017
We are now exploring options for more rigorous
assessment and recording of all preclinical
experience in the clinical skills environment,
possibly with the use of Liftupp for academic year
2017/18. We are also considering introducing an
external moderator, this would be in line with the
BDS Programme.
The School has undertaken to ensure that all February 2017
students record in the patient notes that verbal
consent has been obtained before commencing
treatment at every visit
The School’s Fitness to Practise policy, which is
closely aligned with the GDC Fitness to Practise
document has been disseminated to all staff and
students. However, in addition, the policy has
been circulated to all Oral Health Sciences

January 2017

20

students, and recorded that all students have read
and are familiar with it.
1.3

9

Blueprinting of assessments must be improved.

The School is in the process of blueprinting all
assessments to the GDC Preparing for Practice
Learning Outcomes. We are prioritising the
graduating cohort, moving onto the current year
1 and year 2 with a view to having all current
students’
assessments
blueprinted
by
September 2017. There will then be a rolling
programme of blueprinting.

Graduating cohort
by February 2017

9

The use of student logbooks must be reviewed.

Liftupp is now used across all three years of the September 2016
BSc Programme to record clinical experience. The
logbook is therefore now used as a log for
reflection, progress meetings between the
students and their Tutor, permission to commence
treatment forms and pre-clinical competency
forms.
At progress meetings tutors go through logbooks
to ensure all elements are completed satisfactorily
with Liftupp data. In BSc1 this takes place in
semester 1, weeks 1 & 6, semester 2, weeks 16 &
24. In BSc2 semester 1, week 10 and semester 2,
week 19. In BSc3 semester 1, weeks 1 & 8,
semester 2, weeks 17, 22 and 31.

10,11,14 Monitoring of clinical experience data must be
reviewed and improved.

As stated in observation to action 9, Liftupp has
been implemented across all three years of the
BSc Programme since September 16. Liftupp
aggregates and displays not only the breadth of
experience (progression towards achieving their
minimum recommended totals of procedures) but
also depth / quality of clinical experience. Prior to

Re-inspection February 2017

21

Progress Committees, with the aid of the quick
review panel of the software, the data are
scrutinised by the course leads on a student by
student basis so that any concerns and
experience deficiencies are flagged up and
arrangements put in place for remediation. This
information is also discussed at the schools
Progress Committee. The system also permits
a grading profile review of the development
indicators awarded by the assessors to assist in
calibration of staff. By the end of year 3, students
must have met the requirement that all minimum
recommended totals have been achieved across
all three years of the BSc, with over 50% of these
at developmental indictors 4, 5 or 6
10

The School must ensure that quality management
systems pick up issues that may threaten students’
ability to achieve the GDC learning outcomes at an
early stage.

Regular progress meetings are used to pick up any
areas of concern on individual students’ Liftupp
profiles. Liftupp allows near real time monitoring of
breadth and depth of clinical experience so that
appropriate patients may be steered to individual
students to ensure there are no deficiencies. At
Progress Committees, the quick review panel
feature of the software is used to flag up any
experience deficiencies so these may be
remediated.
Progress meetings are also an opportunity to
discuss any issues of concern e.g. academic
performance or personal issues. Remediation can
then take place to allow the student to progress.
The School undertakes an annual programme
quality enhancement review. A report is
produced which includes findings regarding the
outcome of module reviews and data regarding
student progression. Any potential threats to the

Re-inspection February 2017

22

programme are reported and escalated via the
School committee structure.
11, 20

The contribution to the programme by external
examiners must be reviewed to ensure they can carry
out an effective QA role.

12

The School must ensure the integrity of clinical
experience data collected in outreach settings.

The level of scrutiny that the External Examiners
May 2017
are afforded is in line with that dictated by the
University of Dundee and is outlined in the
External Examiners’ handbook. They are given
full access to all areas of the BSc programme, all
documentation and each student’s progression
towards meeting the GDC’s Preparing for
Practice learning outcomes, from the teaching
material to assessments and clinical data. At the
Progress Committee meeting in April (sign-up), a
report will be generated from Liftupp which will
demonstrate the clinical data and that students
have met their clinical requirements. External
Examiners will be invited to attend this meeting.
In line with the University’s recent move further
towards having External Examiners take a QA
role when assessing Programmes and in
response to this report, the BSc Programme’s
External Examiners will no longer be involved in
examining students in the May 2017 Final Case
Presentation Examination. This will afford them a
better opportunity to focus on effectively carrying
out their QA role.
The Dental School and University leads for
Quality and Academic Standards will continue to
scrutinise all documentation from External
Examiners (in line with University policy) to
ensure that they are fulfilling this role.
Liftupp has now been introduced for the BSc Re-inspection Programme across the Dental School and in all February 2017
three Outreach centres. One of its advantages is
that it improves the integrity of clinical experience
23

13

Clinical milestones must be urgently reviewed to
ensure they are an appropriate barrier to progress.

14

The School must demonstrate that the QA system
deals with potential issues in a timely manner.

data as it is captured consistently and
comprehensively across all areas. Outreach Tutors
attend an annual training day which has involved
Liftupp training and will review practice in light of
accumulated staff data. Staff continue to visit
Outreach centres twice per year to perform a QA
role ensuring consistency and accuracy of clinical
experience recorded in the Outreach centres.
Staff teaching on the BSc Programme have access
to Liftupp data through their own login and can
monitor student experience.
We have replaced clinical milestones with
minimum recommended totals of clinical
procedures. Minimum recommended totals are
cumulative over all three years, with the
requirement that over 50% must be at a
developmental indictor level of 4, 5 or 6.
The School’s committee structure has undergone
a reorganisation to put more effective structures in
place, clarify reporting mechanisms and decision
making responsibilities and to ensure these work
efficiently. Standardised templates for committee
minutes and cover sheets for reporting key items
to higher-level committee has been implemented.
This ensures appropriate actions are agreed and
recorded, and progress against these is
documented, monitored and reported. The School
has worked on improvement of its internal and
external quality assurance, in collaboration with Dr
Lesley McLellan, Director of Quality Assurance
and Academic Standards. The committee structure
review has led to streamlining thus avoiding
inefficiencies and increasing effectiveness of
quality assurance processes.

24

15

The School must investigate methods of increasing
access to patients, particularly paediatric patients as
a matter of urgency

Last spring/summer the University/ NHS met to
discuss the issue of paediatric patient shortages
for undergraduate students. Three actions have
been/ are being put in place to alleviate this
problem although the benefits may not be seen
for some months.
1. The NHS Access Management Team
have agreed that child patients can now
be formally recruited from GDPs and a
shared care arrangement entered into.
2. We are also now working with Dental
Outreach to appoint child patients and
increase training opportunities for
students. However, this is going to be a
longer term plan as it will involve a change
to some of the Outreach centre clinic
appointment processes and some
additional staff training.
3. We have set up an arrangement with the
Public Dental Service whereby they are
‘redirecting’ patients that have been
referred to them, to the Dental Hospital.
4. Springfield Outreach Centre has been
identified as a source for paediatric
patients and an agreement has been set
up to re-route appropriate patients to the
Therapy students.
We are monitoring the numbers of child patients
being seen by students and the dental care items
of treatment that they require closely. If any
students are noted to be low on numbers of
patient contacts or items of treatment, they are
targeted for appointments with child patients and
25

those who need the treatment items where the
student needs to gain experience.

15

The School must show LitfUpp is providing an
increased level of certainty in relation to clinical
experience data.

At the time of the inspection, clinical data was
recorded using two different systems. This was a
period of transition from a paper based system to
using Liftupp across all three years. Now the
School has implemented Liftupp across all three
years, the programme utilises iPads to store
clinical data in one location. Liftupp permits the
recording of near real time clinical performance
data. It is neither reliant upon the manual entry of
paper records, nor prone to transcription error
with data entry delay, and thus gives near real
time measures of performance.

Re-inspection February 2017

16

Assessments must be reviewed to reduce the overreliance on evaluation of logbooks.

As stated previously our clinic mark sheets within Re-inspection the student logbooks are no longer used as a February 2017
demonstration of competence – clinical grading on
Liftupp has far more detail.
In response to the report and since attending the
GDC Workshop on meeting the Standards, we are
in the process of updating blueprinting of the BSc
Programme’s assessments against the GDC
Preparing for Practice learning outcomes. This
document will provide evidence that the students
have attained all learning outcomes across the
three years.

16

The School should consider use of a scribe or the
recording of case presentation examinations.

This is an interesting suggestion by the inspectors.
It has been added to the agenda for discussion at
the next Learning and Teaching & Quality
Academic Standards Committee meeting.

26

17

School must investigate methods of incorporating
patient feedback into assessment.

18

The School must improve reflective learning
opportunities to include enhanced teaching and
recording of reflection. This should include detailed
recording of progress discussions with personal
tutors.

Patient questionnaires piloted in academic year
15/16 are being administered for a six week period
in Semester 2 for BSc 2 Periodontal clinics and
BSc3 Integrated Oral Care clinics. The data
collected will be incorporated into formative
assessment for the current academic year, where
the Programme Year Leads will meet with the
students to discuss their patients’ feedback and
encourage the students to reflect and act upon this
feedback in future clinics.
We are exploring options for academic year 17/18
for summative assessment, for example, a
reflective piece of work on how individualised
student’s patient feedback has changed their
practice.
The School arranged delivery of a lecture on
Reflective Learning to all students (BSc and BDS)
at the start of the academic year. This will be built
into the timetable for forthcoming years. Also in
September, the School implemented a revised
reflective diary for clinical experiences. The
students continue to reflect on each patient
session but in addition are required to complete a
more in depth reflection on one of their cases at the
end of each week. The student is required to
identify their learning needs on completion of this
reflection.
These diaries are reviewed at student progress
meetings with their personal tutors. In BSc1 this
takes place in semester 1, weeks 1 & 6, semester
2, weeks 16 & 24. In BSc2 semester 1, week 10
and semester 2, week 19. In BSc3 semester 1,
weeks 1 & 8, semester 2, weeks 17, 22 and 31.
We have modified the progress meeting recording

Re-inspection February 2017

Re-inspection February 2017

27

form to include more detailed recording of
individual student progress.
21

Guidance for students on the grading schemes used
must be improved.

All students have been given guidance on the September 2016
Liftupp developmental indicators by a member of
the School Liftupp team.
The Programme
Handbook contains the University examination
marking descriptors.
At these sessions the
students were also reminded how to access their
Liftupp data to aid their reflective practice. The
developmental indictor descriptors are available on
clinics at the point of discussion of clinical
experience. Year Leads at progress meetings have
discussed the minimum clinical requirements that
the students are expected to achieve in order to
progress throughout the programme and onto final
exams.

28

Observations from the provider on content of report
None provided

Recommendations to the GDC
The inspectors recommend that this qualification continues to be approved for the current cohort only to apply for registration as a dental
hygienist/therapist with the General Dental Council.
A re-inspection of the programme should take place in February 2017.

29

Annex 1
Inspection purpose and process
1.

As part of its duty to protect patients and promote high standards within the professions it regulates, the General Dental Council (GDC)
quality assures the education and training of student dentists and dental care professionals (DCPs) at institutions whose qualifications
enable the holder to apply for registration with the GDC. It also quality assures new qualifications where it is intended that the qualification
will lead to registration. The aim of this quality assurance activity is to ensure that institutions produce a new registrant who has
demonstrated, on graduation, that they have met the learning outcomes required for registration with the GDC. This ensures that students
who obtain a qualification leading to registration are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner.

2.

Inspections are a key element of the GDC’s quality assurance activity. They enable a recommendation to be made to the Council of the
GDC regarding the ‘sufficiency’ of the programme for registration as a dentist and ‘approval’ of the programme for registration as a dental
care professional. The GDC’s powers are derived under Part II, Section 9 of the Dentists Act 1984 (as amended).

3.

The GDC document ‘Standards for Education’ 2nd edition1 is the framework used to evaluate qualifications. There are 21 Requirements in
three distinct Standards, against which each qualification is assessed.

4.

The education provider is requested to undertake a self-evaluation of the programme against the individual Requirements under the
Standards for Education. This involves stating whether each Requirement is ‘met’, ‘partly met’ or ‘not met’ and to provide evidence in
support of their evaluation. The inspection panel examines this evidence, may request further documentary evidence and gathers further
evidence from discussions with staff and students. The panel will reach a decision on each Requirement, using the following descriptors:

A Requirement is met if:
“There is sufficient appropriate evidence derived from the inspection process. This evidence provides the inspectors with broad confidence
that the provider demonstrates the Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students is supportive of documentary
evidence and the evidence is robust, consistent and not contradictory. There may be minor deficiencies in the evidence supplied but these are
likely to be inconsequential.”

1

http://www.gdc-uk.org/Aboutus/education/Documents/Standards%20for%20Education.pdf

30

A Requirement is partly met if:
“Evidence derived from the inspection process is either incomplete or lacks detail and, as such, fails to convince the inspection panel that the
provider fully demonstrates the Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students may not fully support the
evidence submitted or there may be contradictory information in the evidence provided. There is, however, some evidence of compliance and
it is likely that either (a) the appropriate evidence can be supplied in a short time frame, or, (b) any deficiencies identified can be addressed
and evidenced in the annual monitoring process.”
A Requirement is not met if
“The provider cannot provide evidence to demonstrate a Requirement or the evidence provided is not convincing. The information gathered at
the inspection through meetings with staff and students does not support the evidence provided or the evidence is inconsistent and/or
incompatible with other findings. The deficiencies identified are such as to give rise to serious concern and will require an immediate action
plan from the provider. The consequences of not meeting a Requirement in terms of the overall sufficiency of a programme will depend upon
the compliance of the provider across the range of Requirements and the possible implications for public protection”
5.

Inspection reports highlight areas of strength and draw attention to areas requiring improvement and development, including actions that
are required to be undertaken by the provider. Where an action is needed for a Requirement to be met, the term ‘must’ is used to describe
the obligation on the provider to undertake this action. For these actions the inspectors may stipulate a specific timescale by which the
action must be completed or when an update on progress must be provided. In their observations on the content of the report, the provider
should confirm the anticipated date by which these actions will be completed. Where an action would improve how a Requirement is met,
the term ‘should’ is used and for these actions there will be no due date stipulated. Providers will be asked to report on the progress in
addressing the required actions through the annual monitoring process. Serious concerns about a lack of progress may result in further
inspections or other quality assurance activity.

6.

The QA team aims to send an initial draft of the inspection report to the provider within two months of the conclusion of the inspection. The
provider of the qualification has the opportunity to provide factual corrections on the draft report. Following the production of the final report
the provider is asked to submit observations on, or objections to, the report and the actions listed. Where the inspection panel have
recommended that the programme is sufficient for registration, the Council of the GDC have delegated responsibility to the GDC Registrar
to consider the recommendations of the panel. Should an inspection panel not be able to recommend ‘sufficiency’ or ‘approval’, the report
and observations would be presented to the Council of the GDC for consideration.

7.

The final version of the report and the provider’s observations are published on the GDC website.

31

