Education Provider /
Awarding Body :

Glasgow Caledonian University

Programme / Award /
Qualification:

BSc Oral Health Science

Remit and purpose:

Full inspection referencing the Standards for
Education to determine approval of the award for
the purpose of registration with the GDC as
dental hygienists and dental therapists

Learning Outcomes:

Developing the Dental Team

Programme inspection dates:

25 & 26 March 2013

Examination inspection
dates:

2 & 3 May 2013
(Exam Board meeting 22 May)

Inspection Panel:

Audrey Cowie (Lay member and Chair)
Baldeesh Chana (DCP)
David Young (Dentist)

GDC Staff:

Luke Melia (Lead)
James Marshall

Previous inspection:

First inspection

Outcome:

Recommended that the Glasgow Caledonian
University BSc Oral Health Science programme
is approved for the registration of dental
hygienists and dental therapists to the GDC
register.

1

Inspection Summary
The delivery of the BSc Oral Health Science at Glasgow Caledonian University (GCU) was
found to be well accomplished with a graduating cohort of skilled practitioners fit to practise
at the level of safe beginner. The small cohort of around 12 students per year has fostered a
nurturing training environment that worked well in practice but could be better supported with
underpinning policies and formalised procedures for centrally recording student clinical
experience.
The inspectors were impressed with the provision of an extensive pre-clinical skills
strategywith the restorative teaching element integrated with the BDS Year 2at Glasgow
Dental School. The students clearly benefited from the early interaction with their BDS
peers. Staff and students alike showed an excellent awareness of dental team working to
provide the best possible care for patients.
The central management and particularly the central recording of student clinical
performance required improving. The inspectors noted the difficulties the School has
experienced with a lack of administrative support to input data and felt the overall monitoring
of student clinical experience was not comprehensive enough. Some assessment decisions
relied on the tutors close relationship with students, made possible by the comparatively
small cohort.
The inspection panel was encouraged by the strong emphasis on proactively quality
assuring the integrity of the qualification and its delivery. The School also benefited from the
central strategic support from NHS Education for Scotland (NES), NHS Scotland’s education
and training body that has a national remit relating to education for the NHS workforce. NES
provides a forum for quality assurance across all four dental hygiene and dental therapy
courses in Scotland.
The close working relationship with strategic partners in the NHS was also evident in the
outreach placements. All outreach placements were located in clinical buildings with a
standard mechanism for Health Boards to approach NES with proposals. A memorandum of
understanding was then submitted regarding the provisions to be provided by newly planned
outreach centres, which allowed facilities to be tailored to student training needs.
Purpose of Inspection
1.

As part of its duty to protect patients and promote high standards within the professions
it regulates, the General Dental Council (GDC) quality assures the education and
training of student dentists and dental care professionals (DCPs) at institutions whose
qualifications enable the holder to apply for registration with the GDC and new
qualifications where it is intended that the qualification will lead to registration.

2.

The aim of this quality assurance activity is to ensure that these institutions produce a
new registrant who has demonstrated, on graduation, that he or she has met the
outcomes required for registration with the GDC. This is to ensure that students who
obtain a qualification leading to registration are fit to practise at the level of a safe
beginner.

3.

The inspection focuses on four Standards, with a total of 29 underlying Requirements.
These are contained in the document Standards for Education.

4.

The purpose of this inspection was to make a recommendation to the GDC to determine
whether the programme should be approved as a route for registration as a dental
2

hygienist and dental therapist. The GDC’s powers are derived under the Dentists Act
1984 (as amended) under The General Dental Council (Professions Complementary to
Dentistry) (Qualifications and Supervision of Dental Work) [DCP] Rules Order of Council
2006.
5.

Inspection reports may highlight areas of strength and draw attention to areas requiring
improvement and development, including actions that are required to be undertaken by
the provider. Where an action is needed for a Requirement to be met, the term ‘must’ is
used to describe the obligation on the provider to undertake this action. For these
actions the inspectors may stipulate a specific timescale by which the action must be
completed or when an update on progress must be provided. In their observations on
the content of the report, the provider should confirm the anticipated date by which
these actions will be completed. Where an action would improve how a Requirement is
met, the term ‘should’ is used and for these actions there will be no due date stipulated.
Providers will be asked to report on the progress in addressing the required actions
through the annual monitoring process. Serious concerns about a lack of progress may
result in further inspections or other quality assurance activity.

6.

The provider of the qualification has the opportunity to provide factual corrections on the
draft report. Following the production of the final report the provider is asked to submit
observations on, or objections to, the report and the actions listed. Where the inspection
panel have recommended that the programme be approved for registration, the Council
of the GDC have delegated responsibility to the GDC Registrar to consider the
recommendations of the panel. Should an inspection panel not be able to recommend
approval, the report and observations would be presented to the Council of the GDC for
consideration.

The Inspection
7.

This report sets out the findings of an inspection of the BSc Oral Health Science
awarded by Glasgow Caledonian University. The GDC publication Standards for
Education (version 1.0 November 2012) was used as a framework for the inspection.

8.

The inspection was comprised of three inspection visits. The programme inspection was
carried out on 25 and 26March 2013 and involved meetings with programme staff
involved in the management, delivery and assessment of the programme and all
students enrolled on the programme. The second visit took place between 2 and 3 May
2013, and an inspection of the examination board took place on 22 May and these are
referred to as the examination/student sign-off inspection.

9.

The report contains the findings of the inspection panel across the three visits and with
consideration to supporting documentation prepared by the School to evidence how the
individual requirements under the Standards for Education have been met.

Brief Overview of Qualification
10. The BSc in Oral Health Science is delivered by the Glasgow School of Dental Hygiene
and Therapy which sits within the School of Health and Life Sciences at Glasgow
Caledonian University. There has been an annual intake of 11 to 12 students since 2010
and a projected intake of 14 for 2013.The duration of the programme is three years (115
weeks).

3

11. The programme has a modular framework and is taught through a blend of lectures,
seminars and practical classes. A Learning, Teaching and Assessment Strategy (LTAS)
for each module can be found within individual module descriptors. Both formative and
summative assessments are employed throughout the programme including:
•
•
•
•
•

Short answer tests (SAT)
Objective Structured Clinical Examinations (OSCEs)
Multiple short answer papers
Team-working Presentations
Evaluation of clinical case presentations

12. The qualification benefits from an excellent relationship with the Glasgow Dental
Hospital and School. The Hospital’s pre-clinical skills laboratory is shared by the BSc
students, with the restorative teaching element integrated with Year 2BDS students.
One adult and three paediatric outreach centres are visited by BSc students in Year 2
and Year 3 providing a good level of clinical experience.

Evaluation of Qualification against the Standards for Education
13. As stated above, the Standards for Education were used as a framework for this
inspection. Consideration was given to the fact that the Standards for Education were
approved in late 2012 and that it may take time for providers to make amendments to
programmes to fully meet all of the Requirements under the Standards and to gather the
evidence to demonstrate that each Requirement is being met. The inspection panel
were fully aware of this and the findings of this report should be read with this in mind.
14. The provider was requested to undertake a self-evaluation of the programme against
the individual Requirements under the Standards for Education. This involved stating
whether each Requirement is met, partly met or not met and to provide evidence in
support of their evaluation. The inspection panel examined this evidence, requested
further documentary evidence and gathered further evidence from discussions with staff
and students.
15. The following descriptors have been used to reach a decision on the extent to which the
BSc Oral Health Science awarded by Glasgow Caledonian University meets each
Requirement:
A Requirement is met if:
“There is sufficient appropriate evidence derived from the inspection process. This
evidence provides the inspectors with broad confidence that the provider demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students is supportive
of documentary evidence and the evidence is robust, consistent and not contradictory.
There may be minor deficiencies in the evidence supplied but these are likely to be
inconsequential.”
A Requirement is partly met if:
“Evidence derived from the inspection process is either incomplete or lacks detail and, as
such, fails to convince the inspection panel that the provider fully demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students may not fully
support the evidence submitted or there may be contradictory information in the evidence
provided. There is, however, some evidence of compliance and it is likely that either (a) the
4

appropriate evidence can be supplied in a short time frame, or, (b) any deficiencies
identified can be addressed and evidenced in the annual monitoring process.”
A Requirement is not met if:
“The provider cannot provide evidence to demonstrate a Requirement or the evidence
provided is not convincing. The information gathered at the inspection through meetings
with staff and students does not support the evidence provided or the evidence is
inconsistent and/or incompatible with other findings. The deficiencies identified are such as
to give rise to serious concern and will require an immediate action plan from the provider.
The consequences of not meeting a Requirement in terms of the overall sufficiency of a
programme will depend upon the compliance of the provider across the range of
Requirements and the possible implications for public protection.

5

Standard 1 – Protecting patients
Providers must be aware of their duty to protect the public. Providers must ensure that
patient safety is paramount and care of patients is of an appropriate standard. Any risk
to the safety of patients and their care by students must be minimised
Requirements
Met
Partly Not
met
met
1. Students will provide patient care only when they have
demonstrated adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical
procedures, the student should be assessed as competent in
the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patient



2. Patients must be made aware that they are being treated by
students and give consent



3. Students will only provide patient care in an environment
which is safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with
relevant legislation and requirements regarding patient care



4. When providing patient care and services, students are to be
supervised appropriately according to the activity and the
student’s stage of development



5. Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained.
Clinical supervisors must have appropriate general or
specialist registration with a regulatory body



6. Students and those involved in the delivery of education and
training must be encouraged to raise concerns if they identify
any risks to patient safety



7. Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be
taken by the provider



8. Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and
apply as required. The content and significance of the student
fitness to practise procedures must be conveyed to students
and aligned to GDC student fitness to practise guidance. Staff
involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar
with the GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance



GDC comments
Requirement 1: Students will provide patient care only when they have demonstrated
adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical procedures, the student should be
assessed as competent in the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients(Requirement Met)
There was an eight week Periodontic pre-clinical skills course in Year 1 with an external
examiner involved in the marking for the first clinical exam. The School’s continuous
assessment strategy, clinical logbooks, reflection portfolios and end of year clinical
examinations were considered by the inspection panel and found to provide a good framework
for students to demonstrate adequate knowledge and skills before moving on to treat patients.
6

The pre-clinical assessments for hygiene included four Objective Structured Clinical
Examination (OSCE) stations and the scaling of a quadrant on a dental manikin. Adult and
paediatric restorative components for dental therapy assessed students’ skills on dental
manikins and through a radiology assessment.
The inspection panel noted documentary and oral evidence indicating an excellent pre-clinical
provision in operative dentistry with aspects of the restorative element integrated with the BDS
Year 2 at Glasgow Dental School. This was a commendable example of shared learning at an
early stage in the programme. The benefits of experience were clearly understood by the staff
and students with an appreciation of the importance of members of the dental team working
together to provide the best possible care for patients.

Requirement 2: Patients must be made aware that they are being treated by students
and give consent(Requirement Met)
The inspection panel saw evidence that grey tunics and ID badges were worn to make patients
aware that they were being treated by students. Consent forms were in use in the dental
hospital and within the outreach settings that clearly explained treatment was to be provided by
a student. The forms were signed by the patient, the student and a supervisor after discussion
of a treatment plan.

Requirement 3: Students will only provide patient care in an environment which is safe
and appropriate. The provider must comply with relevant legislation and requirements
regarding patient care(Requirement Met)
The inspection panel was satisfied that the clinical environment was safe and relevant
legislation was met. The programme is subject to NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde health and
safety policies. It was noted that areas of the hospital were being refurbished with interim
arrangements to maintain safe and appropriate standards.
There was good links with outreach placements, which were seen to be subject to the health
and safety policies of their relevant NHS board.
Requirement 4: When providing patient care and services, students are to be
supervised appropriately according to the activity and the student’s stage of
development(Requirement Met)
The inspection panel concluded that the small cohorts of twelve students in each year
allowed for a good level of supervision. The panel were told that the staff to student ratio was
never greater one to five on clinics in the Glasgow Dental Hospital.
The meetings with staff involved with outreach showed an appropriate level of
communication between the School and placements to ensure supervision levels do not drop
when students are treating patients outside of the hospital environment. Tutors go out to a
number of the centres and there was a central point of contact for outreach responsible for
liaising and calibrating supervisors within placements.

7

Requirement 5: Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained. Clinical
supervisors must have appropriate general or specialist registration with a regulatory
body (Requirement Met)
GDC registration was checked by the School and recorded in staff personal records annually.
The inspection panel reviewed tutor CVs and considered them to show appropriate
qualifications and experience for staff working in the capacity of a supervisor on the
programme.
The inspectors were pleased to see that there was a post-graduate teaching diploma that all
teaching staff were expected to achieve within two years, and noted other areas of training
currently being developed.
Requirement 6: Students and those involved in the delivery of education and training
must be encouraged to raise concerns if they identify any risks to patient safety
(Requirement Met)
The inspection panel was provided with examples of the School processes for raising
concerns in advance of the inspection. A strong awareness of School mechanisms was then
evident in meetings with students and staff, particularly with regards to issues of risk to patient
safety. The students had confidence that any such concerns could be raised with a tutor or
within an outreach setting. The students were able to report individual incidents that have or
may affect patient safety on the DATIX incident reporting system.
The staff were aware of the School and wider university procedures for escalating matters,
which were tied to Health Board processes. Tutors showed a sound understanding of the
importance of engaging students with their responsibilities as trainees going into a regulated
profession.
Requirement 7: Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be taken by
the provider(Requirement Met)
The inspection panel was confident that patient safety issues were escalated and appropriately
handled. There was a DATIX Risk Management Information System in place. All members of
staff receive training and a nominated staff member reviews all incidents. The inspectors felt
there could be further development of a School specific system that monitored risk associated
with student practice. The system could be aligned with Health Board procedures, outreach
placements, and regularly emphasised to the students across programme delivery.
Requirement 8: Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and apply as
required. The content and significance of the student fitness to practise procedures
must be conveyed to students and aligned to GDC student fitness to practise guidance.
Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar with the GDC Student
Fitness to Practise Guidance(Requirement Met)
The School provided a student fitness to practise policy that is aligned to GDC guidance. Staff
and students showed a good awareness of their respective responsibilities in conveying and
understanding the policy.

8

Actions
Req.
Actions for the provider
Number
7
The School should consider adopting a specific system to record
patient safety associated with student practice. The system should
be aligned with Health Board procedures, outreach placements,
and regularly emphasised to the students across programme
delivery.

9

Due Date
(if applicable)
Update to be
provided
through the
2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

Standard 2 – Quality evaluation and review of the programme
The provider must have in place effective policy and procedures for the monitoring and
review of the programme
Requirements
Met
Partly Not
met
met
9. The provider will have a framework in place that details how it
manages the quality of the programme which includes
making appropriate changes to ensure the curriculum
continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and
adapts to changing legislation and external guidance. There
must be a clear statement about where responsibility lies for
this function
10. The provider will have systems in place to quality assure
placements
11. Any problems identified through the operation of the quality
management framework must be addressed as soon as
possible
12. Should quality evaluation of the programme identify any
serious threats to the students achieving learning outcomes
through the programme, the GDC must be notified at the
earliest possible opportunity









13. Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external
quality assurance procedures



14. External examiners must be utilised and must be familiar with
the learning outcomes and their context. Providers should
follow QAA guidelines on external examining where
applicable



15. Providers must consider and, where appropriate, act upon
concerns raised or formal reports on the quality of education
and assessment



GDC comments
Requirement 9: The provider will have a framework in place that details how it manages
the quality of the programme which includes making appropriate changes to ensure the
curriculum continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and adapts to
changing legislation and external guidance. There must be a clear statement about
where responsibility lies for this function(Requirement Met)
The framework was provided by the Dental Education Committee and the Glasgow University
Dental School/NHS Liaison Committee .Minutes from both committees were considered by the
inspection panel and discussed with senior staff who demonstrated a good comprehension of
the quality assurance structure and its importance to the integrity of the programme.
The inspection panel reviewed Module Reports, Annual Programme Analysis, and minutes
from a BSc Oral Health Science Strategic Board that meets twice a year, and a Programme
10

Board that meets three times a year. The Strategic Board Meetings have representation from
NHS Education for Scotland, Glasgow Caledonian University, NHS Greater Glasgow and
Clyde and NHS Lanarkshire.
At a more local level, the inspection panel reviewed documents from the programme board at
GCU (Glasgow Caledonian University), which convenes three times a year for curriculum
review. This was the forum where potential curriculum changes were considered through the
university quality office, a stringent process that included opportunities for proposals to be
discussed and reviewed at all levels.
The School management understood a major change could include a newly designed module
or assessment method and advised the inspection panel that the GDC would be consulted in
advance of any major change proposal going forward for GCU consideration.
Requirement 10: The provider will have systems in place to quality assure
placements(Requirement Met)
The inspection panel found that tutors within the School were actively involved in supervising
outreach placements. There was an Outreach Liaison Officer, who was responsible for the
overall coordination of the placements. Student feedback was actively sought and reviewed at
a biannual outreach meeting where issues can be raised, including assessment calibration.
There was also evidence of peer review and assessment training for outreach staff.
The Outreach Liaison Officer explained that they have been paying particular attention to the
paediatric component of the placements. With the success of Childsmile, an NHS Scotland
campaign for tackling children’s oral health improvement, suitable paediatric cases have not
been as widely available. However, the students attend three paediatric outreach placements
and provide a paediatric case presentation in the Year 3 clinical examinations to ensure clinical
coverage within this area.
The outreach provision benefits from the excellent strategic management provided by NHS
Education Scotland (NES). The inspection panel was advised that most placements are
located in new clinical buildings with a standard mechanism for Health Boards to approach
NHS Education for Scotland with new proposals. A memorandum of understanding is then
submitted regarding the provisions to be provided by the outreach centre. A clear single
service responsibility has to be demonstrated before a placement is approved for construction,
which leads to highly specific details of the experience students can expect to have, and what
facilities will be required to support them.
Requirement 11: Any problems identified through the operation of the quality
management framework must be addressed as soon as possible(Requirement Met)
The inspection panel was confident that any problems identified through the operation of the
quality management framework outlined in the narrative for Requirement 9, would be
addressed appropriately and at the earliest opportunity.
Requirement 12: Should quality evaluation of the programme identify any serious
threats to the students achieving learning outcomes through the programme, the GDC
must be notified at the earliest possible opportunity(Requirement Met)
The inspection panel was satisfied by the committee and review framework, outlined in
Requirement 9, together with senior staff’s appreciation of the importance of identifying areas
11

of risk as early as possible. The inspectors were confident that any serious threats to the
students achieving learning outcomes would be identified with the GDC notified at the
appropriate juncture.
Requirement 13: Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external quality
assurance procedures(Requirement Met)
The programme has demonstrated rigorous internal and external quality assurance procedures
within their meeting of Requirements 9, 10, 11 and 12. The inspection panel was encouraged
to find such a strong emphasis on pro-actively quality assuring the integrity of the qualification
and its delivery, and felt this was a real strength within the current management team. The
School also greatly benefited from the central strategic support from NES that provides a forum
for quality assurance and consistency across all four Hygiene Therapy courses in Scotland.
Requirement 14: External examiners must be utilised and must be familiar with the
learning outcomes and their context. Providers should follow QAA guidelines on
external examining where applicable(Requirement Met)
External examiners were utilised and familiar with learning outcomes and their context.
External examiners marked some aspects of the written papers and actively assessed the
clinical examinations (periodontics, and adult and paediatric restorative cases). This was
against QAA guidance; however the inspectors felt that the Year 3 external examiner was able
to ensure consistency within their assessor role because the cohort was small enough for them
to assess all candidates. QAA guidance does state that external examiners “are not normally
responsible for, or involved in, the assessment of individual students,” but the inspectors felt
that the practice was appropriate within context of cohort size and the manner that the
examinations were run in. The Year 3 external examiner also functioned as a reviewer of the
overall examination processes.
Requirement 15: Providers must consider and, where appropriate, act upon concerns
raised or formal reports on the quality of education and assessment(Requirement Met)
The inspection panel was confident that the School will act on concerns raised or formal
reports on the quality of the education and assessment in the programme. There was an
academic link with GCU / Programme Boards meeting each trimester to discuss feedback.
Module reports were completed by module leads detailing grades that were then used for
comparison with previous years. An annual programme analysis was completed at the end of
the academic year and showed new initiatives were being developed in response to feedback.

Actions
Req.
Actions for the provider
Number

Due Date
(if applicable)

None.

12

Standard 3– Student assessment
Assessment must be reliable and valid. The choice of assessment method must be
appropriate to demonstrate achievement of the GDC learning outcomes. Assessors
must be fit to perform the assessment task
Requirements

Met

16. To award the qualification, providers must be assured that
students have demonstrated attainment across the full range
of learning outcomes, at a level sufficient to indicate they are
safe to begin practice. This assurance should be underpinned
by a coherent approach to aggregation and triangulation, as
well as the principles of assessment referred to in these
standards

Partly
met



17. The provider will have in place management systems to plan,
monitor and record the assessment of students throughout
the programme against each of the learning outcomes



18. Assessment must involve a range of methods appropriate to
the learning outcomes and these should be in line with
current practice and routinely monitored, quality assured and
developed



19. Students will have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and will undertake each activity relating
to patient care on sufficient occasions to enable them to
develop the skills and the level of competency to achieve the
relevant GDC learning outcomes





20. The provider should seek to improve student performance by
encouraging reflection and by providing feedback1
21. Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills,
experience and training to undertake the task of assessment,
appropriate general or specialist registration with a regulatory
body
22. Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent
to which assessment processes are rigorous, set at the
correct standard, ensure equity of treatment for students and
have been fairly conducted





23. Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear
criteria. Standard setting must be employed for summative
assessments



24. Where appropriate, patient/peer/customer feedback
should contribute to the assessment process



1

Not
met

Reflective practice should not be part of the assessment process in a way that risks effective student
use

13

25. Where possible, multiple samples of performance must
be taken to ensure the validity and reliability of the
assessment conclusion



26. The standard expected of students in each area to be
assessed must be clear and students and staff involved
in assessment must be aware of this standard



GDC comments
Requirement 16: To award the qualification, providers must be assured that
students have demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes,
at a level sufficient to indicate they are safe to begin practice. This assurance
should be underpinned by a coherent approach to aggregation and triangulation, as
well as the principles of assessment referred to in these standards(Requirement
Met)
The inspectors agreed that the evidence provided in advance of the inspection
demonstrated that the learning outcomes for dental hygiene and dental therapy from
Developing the Dental Team were mapped appropriately against the programme
assessments. Further consideration of the School assessment strategy satisfied the
inspection panel that students have demonstrated attainment across the full range of
learning outcomes.
The inspection panel reviewed the pre-inspection mapping provided in advance of the
inspection within Annex Two. This document requested that the School outline when and
how the relevant learning outcomes from Developing the Dental Team were to be
assessed across the programme. The initial mapping, though basic, was triangulated with
supporting evidence from oral discussions and further paperwork considered over the
course of the inspection.
The inspection panel was satisfied that there was an effective and discerning framework
for assessments with each learning outcome suitably embedded within the qualification.
However, it was felt there was scope to improve the clarity of the blueprinting of the
learning outcomes to each module, assessment and level of attainment required. This
would allow more of a distinction to be made between the dental hygiene components and
the dental therapy ones, which the inspection panel felt was not quite balanced enough,
and was weighted towards the hygiene skills.
Reviews of module results, Assessment Board minutes, grade descriptors and an audit of
student logbooks further illustrated a discerning assessment model. Students had two attempts
to pass end of year clinical examinations. If a candidate was unsuccessful on a second
attempt, they were not permitted to progress to the following year. Coverage of clinical
competency assessments and formative logbooks were considered for examination sign-up.
There was evidence that when a student did not meet the appropriate clinical competence for
progression, they were not signed-up to take final examinations. These candidates were
offered further training and support to bring their skills up to standard. The inspection panel
was informed that the tutor team try and act early when there are signs that a student was
struggling. Tutors also regularly discussed correlation of student experience and attempt to
spread clinical opportunities evenly through each cohort. Student progress was reviewed on a
weekly basis by tutors in term time.
14

Continuous assessment on clinics was appropriate and the students appeared confident in
their clinical skills. The logging of grades awarded for clinical procedures was effective and
showed development, which allowed tutors to monitor a student’s progress. However, this
would be greatly improved with better recording and central monitoring of student clinical
experience.
The outreach provision was excellent and assisted in the attainment of the full range of
clinical learning outcomes. Placements benefit from tutors taking an active involvement in
supervision and the supportive funding links with NHS Education for Scotland (NES).
Requirement 17: The provider will have in place management systems to plan, monitor
and record the assessment of students throughout the programme against each of the
learning outcomes(Requirement Partly Met)
The School’s management systems required further development, particularly the central
recording of student clinical experience and attainment. The inspection panel was satisfied that
current practices were workable, but the systems relied on tutors’ informal knowledge of a
small cohort, and the Integrated Student Information System (ISIS) was not sufficiently tailored
to the specific monitoring needs of a clinical programme.
For this Requirement to be met, a recording system is required that will be aligned with student
clinical logbooks and have functions to allow detailed monitoring of individual student
development. A formal system of recording competencies would enable the School to track the
students’ progression more efficiently and transparently, and improve the student sign-up
protocol at final examinations.
The inspectors heard plans to implement the newly developed system of LIFTUPP
(Longitudinal Integrative Foundation Training Undergraduate to Postgraduate Pathway) within
the next 18 months. LIFTUPP is a central recording IT programme that has established
workplace-based assessment strategies which run on iPads. The inspectors agreed that the
software has great potential and will, in time, provide an exceptional ability to centrally record
clinical experience and student assessment. However, the system will be a recent
development (both in its conception and its adoption by the School), and robust plans will be
needed to manage the implementation and transitional period from older systems.
Requirement 18: Assessment must involve a range of methods appropriate to the
learning outcomes and these should be in line with current practice and routinely
monitored, quality assured and developed(Requirement Partly Met)
The School showed a range of assessment methods within their mapping of the Learning
Outcomes. Assessments and assessment strategy were considered robust and comparable
with other institutions. The inspection panel attended the case presentations and felt the
questions were appropriate and set at the correct level allowing the students to demonstrate
a depth of knowledge and understanding.
Written papers were double marked and appropriately scrutinised by the external examiner.
The inspection panel felt that the questions were somewhat procedural in their structure and
could be improved by adding an element that allowed the student to apply their knowledge as
well as demonstrating it. In the event of two internal examiners failing to agree a mark, the
external examiner was asked to mediate. The inspectors felt that though this is not cited as
common practice within QAA guidance, it was felt that the arrangement was once again
appropriate within context of cohort size and the manner that the examinations were run in.
15

The inspection panel attended the post assessment meeting held by the tutor team after the
final examinations. The inspectors considered the procedures and feedback to be well-handled
and validated by the attendance of the external examiner. There was clear discussion about
how well the assessments had been run and thoughts for future improvements. It was
indicated that the information captured at this meeting would be fed back into the wider
management framework outlined in Requirement 9.
Requirement 19: Students will have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and will undertake each activity relating to patient care on
sufficient occasions to enable them to develop the skills and the level of competency to
achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes(Requirement Met)
The recording of continuous clinical assessment was undertaken in student logbooks but had
not been transferred to a centralised system due to a lack of administrative staff to input the
data. Several logbooks also appeared to be in operation, which often made the totality of
student clinical experience difficult to judge.
Following the inspectors’ visit in March, the overall student clinical experience was calculated
by the School although not always accurately. The discrepancies identified by the inspectors
were seen to be the recording of a lower level of experience than what was found to have been
achieved by the students in their portfolios. The inspection panel appreciated the difficulty in
backdating this sort of information as some elements of procedures may legitimately be
counted for more than one skill and easily missed.
The inspection panel reviewed the amalgamated information and was satisfied that students
were gaining an adequate breadth of procedures. The hygiene components were particularly
well covered with student experience in dental therapy procedures not as notable.
The inspectors felt the School should consider developing an indicative standard for the level
of clinical experience a student should have attained for both disciplines, which could include
consideration of experience, performance and transferrable skills. This would provide a
benchmark that could be utilised in progress and sign-up decisions, and help balance the
student activity between hygiene and therapy procedures.
Requirement 20: The provider should seek to improve student performance by
encouraging reflection and by providing feedback 2(Requirement Partly Met)
Feedback was well embedded in the programme and reflection was mapped into the
programme as an assessment method. The inspection panel felt that the level of feedback by
the tutors was appropriate.
Students undertook a portfolio of reflection assignments and were encouraged to record daily
reflection in their logbooks. Student reflection was occasionally basic though there was
evidence that showed students were actively encouraged to reflect critically and take time to
consider their practice.
Students were enthusiastic about writing up their logbooks and showed an appreciation for the
importance of reflection to their development as a clinical practitioner. It was clear that tutors
emphasised to the cohorts the need to write up logbooks at the end of the day and seek to
identify areas of practice that required improving.
2

Reflective practice should not be part of the assessment process in a way that risks effective student
use

16

The inspection panel agreed that the Virtual Learning Environment (VLE) for accessing
programme materials should be improved for BSc students, which would help promote
reflection. A better link-up between the School and the GCU computer systems would be
hugely beneficial as the BSc students did not currently have a single network to log into where
all module and programme information could easily be accessed and reviewed. Different
aspects of the programme materials were stored on different systems, some of which were
GCU based and some specific to the School of Hygiene and Therapy. The inspectors felt this
should be reviewed.
Requirement 21: Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills, experience
and training to undertake the task of assessment, appropriate general or specialist
registration with a regulatory body(Requirement Partly Met)
The School provided the details of internal and external examiners, which assured the
inspection panel that the examiners had the appropriate skills, experience and training to
undertake the task of assessment, including a GCU guidance handbook. The inspectors
observed that the process benefited from a close working relationship between the
internal and external examiners.
For the clinical examinations, external and internal examiners examined by splitting each
presentation to lead the questioning for half the allotted time. The marking was
undertaken collaboratively at the end of the exam, once the student had left the room. The
role of the scribes was well defined and administration of exam conditions maintained
throughout.
Requirement 22: Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent to
which assessment processes are rigorous, set at the correct standard, ensure
equity of treatment for students and have been fairly conducted(Requirement Partly
Met)
The external examiners were invited to report back and provide feedback on all aspects of the
assessment and examination process. External examiners had sight of the written papers in
advance of the examinations. The Year 3 external examiner combined this function while also
taking an active participation in assessing the case presentations. There was evidence that
external examiners reports were considered within the management framework.
The School intended to have three different external examiners for each of the three years
of the programme. Due to university regulations, this was not possible this year and the
same external examiner performed the function for Year 2 and Year 3. The intention was
that three external examiners will operate from the 2013/14 academic year.
Requirement 23: Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear criteria.
Standard setting must be employed for summative assessments(Requirement Partly
Met)
The inspection panel was satisfied that the assessment model was fair and set against clear
criteria, however, the inspectors agreed that standard setting was basic and required
improvement. The mechanism for standard setting was an informal process of discussion
between the tutors and senior staff, who deferred to the external examiner for borderline
decisions. There was no evidence of the use of any formal standard-setting process.
17

Written modules were marked using the GCU scheme with a 40% pass mark. Clinical modules
were marked within a number sequence between 8-4. The inspectors felt that the five marking
descriptors were satisfactorily worded and ranged from an 8 where a student showed excellent
professionalism and work was performed to the highest standard to a 4, which described the
work as poor with incompetence showed in every aspect.
Requirement 24: Where appropriate, patient/peer/customer feedback should
contribute to the assessment process(Requirement Partly Met)
Patient feedback was gathered by the School and within outreach, though further development
was required for how this data may be appropriately incorporated into the assessment model.
The inspectors were mindful of how difficult it is to standardise patient feedback in relation to
assessments and appreciated this was an area that a lot of institutions were still working on.
Peer feedback was well embedded into various aspects of the programme including oral health
promotion and within the communications skills component that was taught with BDS students
in integrated restorative skills. The staff reported that the feedback between the two groups
was very good and some healthy competition was often sparked that promoted team working.
Requirement 25: Where possible, multiple samples of performance must be taken
to ensure the validity and reliability of the assessment conclusion(Requirement
Met)
Multiple samples of student performance were appropriately mapped by the School in their
pre-inspection documentation. The inspectors were satisfied of the reliability of the assessment
strategy after consideration of its application in practice. Evidence of a discerning process to
award the pass and fail marks was seen at the Examination Board meeting and was in
accordance with GCU regulations.
Requirement 26:The standard expected of students in each area to be assessed
must be clear and students and staff involved in assessment must be aware of this
standard(Requirement Met)
Staff and students indicated they were aware of the expected standard and the assessment
methods used by the School. The inspection panel was informed that module guides were
given to all students at the beginning of a module and updated through annual module reports.
Each assessment relating to a module was clearly defined with examples provided.

Actions
Req.
No
16, 17,
19

Actions for the provider
A formal process of centrally recording clinical activities
undertaken must be implemented. This should be designed to
enable the School to monitor students’ progression more
efficiently.

18

Due date
(if applicable)
Update to be
provided
through the
2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

18

The questions used in written papers must be developed to
ensure that they are less procedural and enable all the
students to demonstrate application of their knowledge.

Update to be
provided
through the
2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

16,19

The School should ensure that there is an even split between
the procedures undertaken as part of the hygiene and therapy
components of the programme, to give the students a more
balanced experience.

Update to be
provided
through the
2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

20

The School must develop the Virtual Learning Environment
(VLE) to offer easier access for students to all course
materials

Update to be
provided
through the
2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

23

The School must develop the method of standard setting that
is undertaken as it is currently at a basic level.

Update to be
provided
through the
2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

24

The School must develop how it incorporates peer and patient
feedback into the assessment model.

Update to be
provided
through the
2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

19

Standard 4 – Equality and diversity
The provider must comply with equal opportunities and discrimination legislation and
practice. They must also advocate this practice to students
Requirements

Met

27. Providers must adhere to current legislation and best practice
guidance relating to equality and diversity
28. Staff will receive training on equality and diversity,
development and appraisal mechanisms will include this
29. Providers will convey to students the importance of
compliance with equality and diversity law and principles of
the four UK nations both during training and after they begin
practice

Partly Not
met
met







GDC comments
Requirement 27: Providers must adhere to current legislation and best practice
guidance relating to equality and diversity(Requirement Met)
The School has taken part in an Equality Impact Assessment (EQIA) through NHS Greater
Glasgow and Clyde Health Board. This is the Scottish Government’s “framework for delivering
a culture change in the NHS where the patient focus was at the heart of service design and
delivery.”
A revised Equality and Diversity Policy is being developed, together with a new Equality
Scheme that will outline the University's approach to mainstreaming equality and diversity, and
developing Equality Outcomes in line with Equality Act 2010 requirements.
The University has a governance structure including a governance committee with
representatives from the School in attendance. The inspection panel was informed that
equality and diversity and patient involvement was a topic that has been discussed at the
meeting for last three years. There was an understanding that it was a major aspect of the
health care agenda.

Requirement 28: Staff will receive training on equality and diversity, development and
appraisal mechanisms will include this(Requirement Partly Met)
All School members of staff were NHS employees and as such were subject to mandatory
requirements regarding equality and diversity training. There was evidence that the School
monitored and supported training but no details for its formal inclusion in staff appraisal
mechanisms. This aspect will require further development.

20

Requirement 29: Providers will convey to students the importance of compliance with
equality and diversity law and principles of the four UK nations both during training and
after they begin practice(Requirement Partly Met)
Student showed a good level of awareness of the importance of compliance with equality and
diversity laws and principles. They received lectures both internally within the School of
Hygiene and Therapy, and wider ranging lectures at GCU. However, the inspection panel
agreed that more could be done to embed the principles throughout the three year programme
and reinforce the importance within each module.
Actions
Req.
No
28

Actions for the provider

29

The School must undertake further work to embed the equality
and diversity principles within the teaching across the three
years of the programme.

The School must include an equality and diversity aspect
within formal staff appraisal mechanisms.

21

Due date
(if applicable)
Update to be
provided
through the
2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise
Update to be
provided
through the
2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

Summary of Actions
No

Action

Observations

Due date

Response from Provider
7

The School should consider adopting a specific
system to record patient safety associated with
student practice. The system should be aligned
with Health Board procedures, outreach
placements, and regularly emphasised to the
students across programme delivery.

All departments within GG&C and Lanarkshire
Health Boards must adhere to The Health and
Safety Policy. The Director of Human Resources is
responsible for ensuring that the Staff Governance
Committee of the NHS Board is satisfied that the
organisation is meeting its obligations under the
Staff Governance Standard to provide an improved
and safe working environment for staff and
students.

Update to be
provided
through the
2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

We feel that these measures are robust and allow
for consistency within boards and the avoidance of
duplication.
DATIX is the system which aligns with all Health
Boards and Outreach Placements, however to
enhance this process the School have been in
discussions with Glasgow University to extrapolate
the information regarding students involved in
DATIX incidents. This information can then be
forwarded to GCU who have ultimate
accountability.
16, 17,
19

A formal process of centrally recording clinical
activities undertaken must be implemented. This
must enable the School to monitor students’

Further to the appointment of a Programme
Administrator, student’s clinical activity is now
recorded weekly on an Electronic Database. These
22

Update to be
provided
through the

progression more efficiently.

figures are examined each week by Year Coordinators, allowing an easy process of targeting
correct clinical experience to the appropriate
students.

2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

This has greatly enhanced accuracy of recording
activity and no longer relies on tutor’s informal
knowledge of a small cohort.
The efficiency of this new system will also greatly
improve the student sign-up protocol at final
examinations.
The long term goal is the implementation of
LIFTUPP (Longitudinal Integrative Foundation
Training Undergraduate to Postgraduate Pathway)

18

The questions used in written papers must be
developed to ensure that they are less
procedural and enable all the students to apply
their knowledge.

Currently two members of staff are external
examiners for the RCS England and RCS
Edinburgh, a large part of this role has involved
question writing and standard setting for Hygiene
and Therapy Exams.
At present we are liaising with academic staff in
GCU, Glasgow University and both Royal Colleges
regarding staff undergoing training.

16, 19

The School should ensure that there is an even
split between the procedures undertaken as part
of the hygiene and therapy components of the
course, to give the students a more balanced
experience.

As all Level 1 modules are related to prevention
and periodontal disease, students are involved in
periodontal clinical treatment only. All
competencies and assessment reflect this.
Year 2 students progress to Adult restorative
23

Update to be
provided
through the
2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

Update to be
provided
through the
2014 GDC
Annual

clinical skills in Trimester 1 to coincide with BDS
teaching. From this period on, there is an even
balance of all clinical experience.

Monitoring
exercise

20

The School must develop the Virtual Learning
Environment (VLE) to offer easier access for
students to all course materials

The School now has a Programme Administrator
who now inputs all course material onto GCU
Virtual Learning Environment known as
GCULearn.

Update to be
provided
through the
2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

23

The School must develop the method of
standard setting that is undertaken as it is
currently at a basic level.

Presently working with Academic staff within
Glasgow University to discuss ways in which a
Question Bank can be created to allow use for
both BDS and BSc Programmes.
We have also had input from Academic staff at
GCU. This will ensure a more robust method of
standard setting.

Update to be
provided
through the
2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

24

The School must continue to develop how it
intends to incorporate peer and patient feedback
into the assessment model.

-Two Tutors currently undertaking training at GCU
regarding online feedback to students allowing
both assessment grades and feedback to occur in
a timely manner.

Update to be
provided
through the
2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

-Patient Focused Public Involvement Group within
NHSGG&C has devised a patient feedback
questionnaire which students will now be
encouraged to utilise.

24

28

The School must include an equality and
diversity aspect within formal staff appraisal
mechanisms.

This is currently carried out and recorded
electronically via Knowledge and skills framework
and embedded in all staff’s personal development
plans. This is a core dimension within E-KSF.

29

The School must undertake further work to
embed the equality and diversity principles
within the teaching across the three years of the
programme.

We fully agree that this must be included and we
will provide an update on how this is proceeding
through the GDC Annual Monitoring Report.

Update to be
provided
through the
2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise
Update to be
provided
through the
2014 GDC
Annual
Monitoring
exercise

Observations from the provider on content of report
I hope that this is sufficient information for you in advance of the GDC’s Annual Monitoring Exercise. However please advise me if you require
further clarification or information.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the GDC Inspection Panel for their considerate and unobtrusive approach in carrying out this
Inspection. This was much appreciated by the students and staff particularly during the final examination.
Angela McGee
Programme Director
BSc Oral Health Science
20th December 2013.

25

Recommendation to the GDC
The inspectors recommend that this qualification is approved for holders to apply for registration as a dental hygienist and dental therapist with
the General Dental Council.

26

