INSPECTION REPORT
Education provider/ Awarding
Body:

University of Dundee

Programme/Award:

BSc Oral Health Sciences

Remit and purpose:

Full inspection referencing the Standards for
Education to determine approval of the award for
the purpose of registration with the GDC as a
dental hygienist/therapist

Learning Outcomes:

Preparing for Practice (Hygiene and therapy)

Programme inspection dates:

18 April 2018

Inspection panel:

Gail Mortimer (Chair and Lay Member)
Joanne Brindley (DCP Member)
David Young (Dentist Member)

GDC Staff:

Peter Butler

Outcome:

Recommended that the BSc continues to be
approved for graduating students to register as
dental hygienists/dental therapists

1

Full details of the inspection process can be found in the annex
Inspection summary
For this further re-inspection of the BSc Oral Health Sciences programme, the inspectors
were extremely pleased to see that, building on developments form the previous reports,
there had been a further progress made in improving the programme. Most requirements
have now moved from Partly Met to Met. The panel were tremendously pleased to note this
enhancement of the provision at Dundee. In particular, the panel were assured that staff
have a full understanding of the grading system and that calibration procedures are working
well. Patient access is vastly improved, and the panel hope the school continues to strive to
find ways of expanding experience gained by students going forward. The GDC should be
kept up to date on key developments in this area. The panel also wishes the school to keep
the GDC updated on how the minimum recommended totals are being monitored and
revised.

Background and overview of Qualification
Annual intake
Programme duration

10 students
Year 1 = 32 weeks
Year 2 = 35 weeks
Year 3 = 35 weeks

Format of programme

Year 1
Foundation: lectures, seminars, practicals,
online modules
Restorative 1: lectures, seminars, Clinical
skills practical sessions
Biomedical Sciences & Oral Biology:
lectures, seminars, practicals
Plaque-related Diseases: lectures,
seminars, practicals
Clinical Practice 1: lectures, seminars,
online modules, clinical sessions,
shadowing the BSc2 students in
Periodontal clinics
Year 2
Restorative 2: lectures, seminars, Clinical
skills practical sessions
Human Disease: lectures, seminars,
practicals
Imaging: lectures, practicals
Behavioural Sciences: lectures, seminars
Clinical Practice 2: seminars, clinical
sessions, shadowing the BSc3 students in
Restorative clinics & Paeds clinics and
shadowing in Dental A&E

2

Year 3
The Developing Dentition: lectures,
seminars, Clinical skills practical sessions
The Therapist and the Community:
lectures, seminars
Clinical Practice 3: lectures, seminars,
clinical sessions, Outreach placements,
shadowing in Restorative Consultant
clinics, Dental A&E and Oral Medicine
clinics
The panel wishes to thank the staff, students, and external stakeholders involved with the
BSc Oral Health Sciences programme for their co-operation and assistance with the
inspection.

3

Standard 1 – Protecting patients
Providers must be aware of their duty to protect the public. Providers must ensure that
patient safety is paramount and care of patients is of an appropriate standard. Any risk
to the safety of patients and their care by students must be minimised.
Requirements
Met
Partly Not
met
met
1. Students must provide patient care only when they have
demonstrated adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical
✓
✓
procedures, the student should be assessed as competent in
the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients.

2. Providers must have systems in place to inform patients that
they may be treated by students and the possible implications
of this. Patient agreement to treatment by a student must be
obtained and recorded prior to treatment commencing.

✓

3. Students must only provide patient care in an environment
which is safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with
relevant legislation and requirements regarding patient care,
including equality and diversity, wherever treatment takes
place.

✓

4. When providing patient care and services, providers must
ensure that students are supervised appropriately according to
the activity and the student’s stage of development.

✓

5. Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained.
This should include training in equality and diversity
legislation relevant for the role. Clinical supervisors must
have appropriate general or specialist registration with a
UK regulatory body.

✓

6. Providers must ensure that students and all those involved in
the delivery of education and training are aware of their
obligation to raise concerns if they identify any risks to patient
safety and the need for candour when things go wrong.
Providers should publish policies so that it is clear to all
parities how concerns will be raised and how these concerns
will be acted upon. Providers must support those who do raise
concerns and provide assurance that staff and students will
not be penalised for doing so.

✓

7. Systems must be in place to identify and record issues that may
affect patient safety. Should a patient safety issue arise,
appropriate action must be taken by the provider and where
necessary the relevant regulatory body should be notified.

✓

8. Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and
apply as required. The content and significance of the student
fitness to practise procedures must be conveyed to students
and aligned to GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance.

✓

4

Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be
familiar with the GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance.
Providers must also ensure that the GDC’s Standards for the
Dental Team are embedded within student training.

Requirement 1: Students must provide patient care only when they have demonstrated
adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical procedures, the student should be
assessed as competent in the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients. (Requirement now Met)
2017 Actions:
1. A logbook for the recording of student experience in the pre-clinical paediatric course
must be introduced.
Previous reports outlined the panel’s concerns regarding the robustness of the pre-clinical
experience gained by students, particularly as there was a reliance on pre-clinical paediatric
experience to bolster the low experience gained later during the programme. The inspectors
were pleased to see a great deal of progress in this area and agreed this requirement was
now met. The GDC should be kept up-to-date with further developments and progress in
improving monitoring the pre-clinical aspects of the programme as part of the response to this
report and via the annual monitoring process.
Actions
No
Actions for the Provider
1
The GDC should be kept up-to-date with further developments
and progress in improving monitoring the pre-clinical aspects of
the programme as part of the annual monitoring process.

Due date
Via
observations
and 2019
annual
monitoring

5

Standard 2 – Quality evaluation and review of the programme
The provider must have in place effective policy and procedures for the monitoring and
review of the programme.
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
9. The provider must have a framework in place that details how
✓
✓
it manages the quality of the programme which includes
making appropriate changes to ensure the curriculum
continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and
adapts to changing legislation and external guidance. There
must be a clear statement about where responsibility lies for
this function.

10. Any concerns identified through the Quality Management
framework, including internal and external reports relating to
quality, must be addressed as soon as possible and the GDC
notified of serious threats to students achieving the learning
outcomes.

✓

✓

11. Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external
quality assurance procedures. External quality assurance
should include the use of external examiners, who should be
familiar with the GDC learning outcomes and their context
and QAA guidelines should be followed where applicable.
Patient and/or customer feedback must be collected and
used to inform programme development.

✓

✓

✓

✓

12. The provider must have effective systems in place to quality
assure placements where students deliver treatment to
ensure that patient care and student assessment across all
locations meets these Standards. The quality assurance
systems should include the regular collection of student and
patient feedback relating to placements.

✓

GDC comments
Requirement 10: Any concerns identified through the Quality Management framework,
including internal and external reports relating to quality, must be addressed as soon
as possible and the GDC notified of serious threats to students achieving the learning
outcomes. The provider will have systems in place to quality assure placements.
(Requirement revised from Partly Met to Met)
2017 Actions:
1. On-going training for staff and students in the use of LIFTUPP and mechanisms to ensure
the accuracy of the data inputted must be put in place.
Staff met by the panel reported that they felt very confident in the use of LIFTUPP. There are
regular training days which also include staff from clinical locations outside of the dental
school. These events have revealed that staff are well calibrated and are all grading in the

6

expected way. Similarly, an examination of LIFTUPP data has shown that staff are grading
students in a consistent manner when compared to their colleagues. The school are,
therefore, satisfied that this confirms the success of training and calibration provided to staff.
Annual calibration meetings look at case studies and discussions take place to decide upon
the appropriate grading level to be applied for that particular treatment type.
2. The clinical alert procedures must be clarified.
The panel were assured that the clinical alert procedures were now understood by all relevant
staff, including those based in outreach facilities, and that the Programme Lead was now
receiving notification of all clinical alerts which had not previously been the case. The
Programme Lead is only required to undertake specific actions when clinical alerts relate
directly to the BSc programme. The panel were also informed that the triggers for instigating a
clinical alert had been expanded and broadened. Previously, a clinical alert was triggered only
when patient safety had been directly compromised. Now, a clinical alert can also be triggered
by a procedure being carried out on an incorrect tooth or site. In very serious circumstances,
unprofessional behaviour also results in a clinical alert. There had been no clinical alerts within
the past 12 months. The panel were extremely pleased to learn of these developments and
agreed that this action had been well handled. The panel were also reassured that students
they met with understood the clinical alert system – both its purpose and the mechanisms
being used.
Requirement 11: Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external quality
assurance procedures. External quality assurance should include the use of external
examiners, who should be familiar with the GDC learning outcomes and their context
and QAA guidelines should be followed where applicable. Patient and/or customer
feedback must be collected and used to inform programme development. (Requirement
revised from Partly Met to Met)
2017 Actions:
1. The school must continue to establish methods to reduce the potential for recording errors.
The panel are aware that any system allows scope for errors to be made and were satisfied
that the school are taking all necessary measures to ensure that the chances of recording
errors being made are mitigated as far as possible. The panel would urge staff to continue to
develop methods which will ensure the reliability of data relating to the performance of
students undertaking the programme.
Actions
No

Actions for the Provider
None

Due date

7

Standard 3– Student assessment
Assessment must be reliable and valid. The choice of assessment method must be
appropriate to demonstrate achievement of the GDC learning outcomes. Assessors
must be fit to perform the assessment task.
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
13. To award the qualification, providers must be assured that
students have demonstrated attainment across the full range
✓
✓
of learning outcomes, and that they are fit to practise at the
level of a safe beginner. Evidence must be provided that
demonstrates this assurance, which should be supported by
a coherent approach to the principles of assessment referred
to in these standards.
14. The provider must have in place management systems to
plan, monitor and centrally record the assessment of
students, including the monitoring of clinical and/or technical
experience, throughout the programme against each of the
learning outcomes.

✓

15. Students must have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients and procedures and should undertake each activity
relating to patient care on sufficient occasions to enable them
to develop the skills and the level of competency to achieve
the relevant learning outcomes.
16. Providers must demonstrate that assessments are fit for
purpose and deliver results which are valid and reliable. The
methods of assessment used must be appropriate to the
learning outcomes, in line with current and best practice and
be routinely monitored, quality assured and developed.
17. Assessment must utilise feedback collected from a variety of
sources, which should include other members of the dental
team, peers, patients and/or customers.
18. The provider must support students to improve their
performance by providing regular feedback and by
encouraging students to reflect on their practice.

19. Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills,
experience and training to undertake the task of assessment,
including appropriate general or specialist registration with a
UK regulatory body. Examiners/assessors should have
received training in equality and diversity relevant for their
role.
20. Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent
to which assessment processes are rigorous, set at the
correct standard, ensure equity of treatment for students and
have been fairly conducted. The responsibilities of the
external examiners must be clearly documented.

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

8

21. Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear
criteria. The standard expected of students in each area
to be assessed must be clear and students and staff
involved in assessment must be aware of this standard.
An appropriate standard setting process must be
employed for summative assessments.

✓

GDC comments
Requirement 13: To award the qualification, providers must be assured that students
have demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes, and that they
are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner. Evidence must be provided that
demonstrates this assurance, which should be supported by a coherent approach to the
principles of assessment referred to in these standards. (Requirement remains Partly
Met)
2017 Actions:
1. Minimum recommended totals must be reviewed.
Although the minimum recommended totals continue to be reviewed by the school, the panel
agreed there was scope for this to be reviewed further since some of the minimum
recommended totals remained relatively low. The panel were given useful information
regarding how minimum recommended totals are monitored across each year of the
programme and then, cumulatively, in the final year as part of sign-up for finals procedures.
Further updates from the school should be supplied by the school as part of the response to
this report and to future annual monitoring processes to cover how these minimum
recommended totals are being developed and enhanced.
2. The school must review and clarify the level at which a ‘safe beginner’ is set.
At previous inspections, the panel were concerned that there was a lack of understanding
between members of staff and students undertaking the programme regarding the level of
‘safe beginner’ and how this was being applied. More specifically, the inspectors were
concerned that students were achieving ‘safe beginner’ level despite requiring intervention
during some practical procedures. The panel were pleased that, during this visit, they were
provided with assurance that work has been undertaken by staff leading the programme to
ensure there is clarity and understanding across the complement of staff involved with the
course. Staff were all aware of the grading level to be applied via LIFTUPP for students
reaching the level of a ‘safe beginner’. The panel were informed that calibration sessions had
been used to discuss the fine line that exists between being a safe practitioner with room for
improvement and being unsafe.
Requirement 14: The provider must have in place management systems to plan, monitor
and centrally record the assessment of students, including the monitoring of clinical
and/or technical experience, throughout the programme against each of the learning
outcomes. (Requirement revised from Partly Met to Met)
2017 Actions:
1. The school must continue to monitor consistency of student work via LIFTUPP.

9

The school have maintained regular meetings to monitor LIFTUPP progress data and these
take place each semester. Students and tutors also keep track of their progress and students
meet with the year lead every 6 weeks to review their progress. Discussions will tend to focus
on both consistency of performance as well as comments received from tutors regarding
performance. These meetings can also be used to identify means of improving confidence and
consistency – this might involve additional time in the clinical skills lab or referral to pastoral
support offered by the University. The panel were told that LIFTUPP is providing a much
clearer and detailed picture of student experience and one that allows students to take
ownership of the data stored regarding their clinical work. The panel were pleased to hear that
students are very alert to ensuring the accuracy of the data stored in LIFTUPP and that this
forms an important part of the regular progress meetings they take part in.
Requirement 15: Students must have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and should undertake each activity relating to patient care on
sufficient occasions to enable them to develop the skills and the level of competency to
achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes. (Requirement remains Partly Met)
2017 Actions:
1. The School must continue with initiatives to improve students’ access to patients.
There has been a concerted effort to improve access to patients since the previous inspection
took place with a particular focus on paediatric patient access. The Springfield outreach centre
in Arbroath has been utilised to increase patient access and the school has set up shared care
agreements with local GDPs who have agreed to send paediatric patients to Springfield for
treatment by BSc students. The King’s Cross outreach clinic is brand new to the BSc
programme and it is likely that use of this site will be extended in future to assist in increasing
capacity. This location is exclusively providing paediatric patients. Other initiatives to increase
patient access are ongoing and this includes promotion and recruitment campaigns. The panel
were pleased to learn of these improvements and agreed that they will lead to increased
benefits for students. They were especially pleased to hear from students that they felt an
increased confidence in how they manage interactions with child patients. The inspectors
would like an update on how access to patients is increasing as well as information of further
developments and actions being planned to improve clinical experience.

Requirement 17: Assessment must utilise feedback collected from a variety of sources,
which should include other members of the dental team, peers, patients and/or
customers. (Requirement revised from Partly Met to Met)
2017 Actions:
1. The School must continue to develop plans for incorporating patient feedback into
assessments.
The panel acknowledges that it can be difficult to make meaningful use of patient feedback
when the feedback gathered tends to be largely positive and, therefore, provides little in the
way of scope to focus on how treatment of patients can be improved. In the response to the
previous report, the panel were provided with information regarding changes made to the
capture of feedback from patients via Optical Character Recognition (OCR) questionnaires.
The panel were pleased to learn that the school has made discussions around the feedback
form an element of summative assessments within the clinical practice module. The inspectors
hope that this can be further developed and refined in the future.

10

Requirement 18: The provider must support students to improve their performance by
providing regular feedback and by encouraging students to reflect on their practice.
(Requirement revised from Not Met to Partly Met)
2017 Actions:
1. The School must continue to develop and refine the reflective elements of the programme.
Good progress is being made in this area and the panel acknowledges that it will take time to
fully develop and refine the reflective elements of the BSc programme. The panel were
pleased to hear from students they met with that they felt there was an increasing emphasis on
reflection within the programme. The panel hope that the school will continue to build on this
progress and look forward to hearing how this aspect of the programme is evolving. Staff met
by the panel supported the statements of students by noting that as the programme
progresses, and as their professionalism develops and strengthens, students seem to gain a
better understanding of the importance of reflection in the role they will be undertaking as part
of the dental team. Improved tutorials and better guidance from the school reinforces this
growth.
Actions
No
13

Actions for the Provider
Further updates from the school should be supplied by the
school as part of the response to this report and to future annual
monitoring processes to cover how these totals are being
developed and enhanced.

Due date
Via
observations
and 2019
annual
monitoring

15

An update must be provided detailing how access to patients is
increasing as well as information of further developments and
actions being planned to improve clinical experience.

Via
observations
and 2019
annual
monitoring

18

The school should update the GDC on progress being made to
refine and enhance the reflective elements of the programme

Via
observations
and 2019
annual
monitoring

11

Summary of Actions
Req.
number

Action

Observations

Due date

Response from Provider
1.1

1

The GDC should be kept up-to-date
with further developments and
progress in improving monitoring the
pre-clinical aspects of the programme
as part of the annual monitoring
process.

13

Further updates from the school
should be supplied by the school as
part of the response to this report and
to future annual monitoring processes
to cover how these totals are being
developed and enhanced.

15

An update must be provided detailing
how access to patients is increasing
as well as information of further
developments and actions being
planned to improve clinical
experience.

All preclinical courses in the BSc programme now culminate in a
summative assessment prior to patient clinics.
The BSc1 periodontal skills and BSc2 restorative skills courses have
always had a gateway to clinics summative assessment. This
academic year (2018/19) the BSc3 paediatric restorative skills
assessment moved from a competency- based formative assessment
to competency-based summative assessment.
The numbers of procedures that are counted as part of the minimum
recommended totals are regularly monitored by the Year Leads. This
not only ensures that students meet and normally exceed them but
also allows us to look for evidence that we can raise the minimum. A
recent analysis of LIFTUPP data has allowed us to increase the
minimum recommended totals in a number of key areas.

2019 Annual
Monitoring

Last academic year, Kings Cross Outreach Centre was introduced as
an additional placement for the final year students towards the end of
semester 2 (for paediatric experience only). This year our final year
students have rotated through Kings Cross Outreach Centre for the
whole of the year.

2019 Annual
Monitoring

2019 Annual
Monitoring

Current arrangements for patient recruitment:
• The established link with the Public Dental Service for
potentially suitable children to be referred to the building
continues.
• Posters and email adverts have been circulated inviting staff
to volunteer to become a patient for student clinics.

12

Internet recruitment through the University’s web page “Register with
a dentist” (https://www.dundee.ac.uk/student-services/health/registerwith-a-dentist/) and on the School’s web page
(https://dentistry.dundee.ac.uk/dundee-dental-hospital) with a link on
the Hospital web page
(https://www.nhstayside.scot.nhs.uk/GoingToHospital/OurPremisesAZ/DundeeDentalHospital/index.htm).
• Mass recruitment campaign run jointly by the School and
Hospital at matriculation in 2018.
• Walk-in recruitment/registration.
All patients are initially assessed for suitability on one of four
Screening Clinics each week for Restorative Dentistry and children
are booked with academic clinicians in Paediatric Dentistry to assess
their suitability. The mass recruitment campaign at matriculation in
2018 produced 600 potential patients and walk-in/ internet
recruitment produces a smaller but a steady flow of patients.
Future developments:
• As part of the e-referral project, which is ready to go live, a
shared-care approach with GDPs and the PDS for patients
requiring a large course of treatment is planned using a
specific referral form.
• Further recruitment campaign at matriculation in 2019.
• Continue with existing walk-in and internet recruitment
arrangements and if patient flow necessitates, increase the
number of Screening Clinics.
1.2

18

The School should update the GDC
on progress being made to refine and
enhance the reflective elements of the
programme.

The Enhanced Reflection assessment was introduced last academic
year as a summative assessment for the final year students
(contributing to 5% of the Clinical Practice 3 module). BSc1 and 2
undertook the same Enhanced Reflection and were formatively
assessed on their work.

2019 Annual
Monitoring

13

This year, all three years of the programme are summatively
assessed on this piece of work, contributing to 5% of Clinical Practice
1, 2 and 3 modules respectively.
Next academic year we plan to introduce Nurse feedback into the
clinics. This will be incorporated into the Enhanced Reflection.

14

Observations from the provider on content of report
The School are grateful to be given the opportunity to reflect and comment on the Inspection report. We would like to thank the panel for
the many positive comments made within the report. We recognise that there are areas of the programme that have been enhanced as a
result of the Inspection, for example, the introduction of LIFTUPP and the Enhanced Reflection which is now summatively assessed
across the whole programme. We would, however, like to take this opportunity to comment on what we believe to be valuable reflections
of our BSc Oral Health Sciences GDC Inspection experience and reports.
• Our 2016 Inspection was prepared for by the School drawing on the actions and recommendations from the previous 2014/15 GDC
Inspection of the BDS Programme on the basis that there are many common features between the two programmes. There were
however striking differences in the approach taken by the two Inspection panels and thus on what appeared to be acceptable to the
GDC. One example being a focus on minimum numbers of procedures to be carried out by the students rather than the quality of
their work.
• During the 2016 inspection, our perception was that panel members were overly confrontational. Their approach to the Inspection
questioned our professional ability and integrity. It was particularly disappointing that one of these confrontations was around
managing dental caries in primary teeth and the apparent dismissal of the evidence-based approach to managing caries in these
teeth that stems from world leading research carried out at Dundee. This was matched by what we perceived to be condescending
language used in the resultant report.
• Following the March 2016 inspection, we received the draft Inspection report in November 2016 – a delay of 8 months. This report
informed us that the programme would be subject to re-inspection in February 2017. Following this re-inspection there was a 9
month wait for that report (November 2017), informing us of a further re-inspection in April 2018. These delays meant it was
impossible to implement all actions prior to the re-inspections. The first and second inspection reports arrived months after the start
of the new academic year and too late for Regulation changes to be made for the respective years.
• Our experience of the third inspection was much more positive. However, given that none of the scheduled meetings lasted more
than a few minutes we felt that this inspection could have been met without Inspection Panel having to travel to Dundee. Possibly
through an Annual Monitoring report, thus avoiding the inevitable disruption and time spent as staff were diverted from normal
duties to plan for the re-inspection.
• Notwithstanding the above reflections we are naturally very pleased that the BSc in Oral Health Sciences was found to remain
sufficient.
• The final Inspection report highlights areas where further improvements should be made and we look forward to reporting progress
via annual monitoring.

15

Recommendations to the GDC
The inspectors recommend that this qualification continues to be approved for the current cohort only to apply for registration as a dental
hygienist/therapist with the General Dental Council.

16

Annex 1
Inspection purpose and process
1.

As part of its duty to protect patients and promote high standards within the professions it regulates, the General Dental Council (GDC)
quality assures the education and training of student dentists and dental care professionals (DCPs) at institutions whose qualifications
enable the holder to apply for registration with the GDC. It also quality assures new qualifications where it is intended that the qualification
will lead to registration. The aim of this quality assurance activity is to ensure that institutions produce a new registrant who has
demonstrated, on graduation, that they have met the learning outcomes required for registration with the GDC. This ensures that students
who obtain a qualification leading to registration are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner.

2.

Inspections are a key element of the GDC’s quality assurance activity. They enable a recommendation to be made to the Council of the
GDC regarding the ‘sufficiency’ of the programme for registration as a dentist and ‘approval’ of the programme for registration as a dental
care professional. The GDC’s powers are derived under Part II, Section 9 of the Dentists Act 1984 (as amended).

3.

The GDC document ‘Standards for Education’ 2nd edition1 is the framework used to evaluate qualifications. There are 21 Requirements in
three distinct Standards, against which each qualification is assessed.

4.

The education provider is requested to undertake a self-evaluation of the programme against the individual Requirements under the
Standards for Education. This involves stating whether each Requirement is ‘met’, ‘partly met’ or ‘not met’ and to provide evidence in
support of their evaluation. The inspection panel examines this evidence, may request further documentary evidence and gathers further
evidence from discussions with staff and students. The panel will reach a decision on each Requirement, using the following descriptors:

A Requirement is met if:
“There is sufficient appropriate evidence derived from the inspection process. This evidence provides the inspectors with broad confidence
that the provider demonstrates the Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students is supportive of documentary
evidence and the evidence is robust, consistent and not contradictory. There may be minor deficiencies in the evidence supplied but these are
likely to be inconsequential.”

1

http://www.gdc-uk.org/Aboutus/education/Documents/Standards%20for%20Education.pdf

17

A Requirement is partly met if:
“Evidence derived from the inspection process is either incomplete or lacks detail and, as such, fails to convince the inspection panel that the
provider fully demonstrates the Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students may not fully support the
evidence submitted or there may be contradictory information in the evidence provided. There is, however, some evidence of compliance and
it is likely that either (a) the appropriate evidence can be supplied in a short time frame, or, (b) any deficiencies identified can be addressed
and evidenced in the annual monitoring process.”
A Requirement is not met if
“The provider cannot provide evidence to demonstrate a Requirement or the evidence provided is not convincing. The information gathered at
the inspection through meetings with staff and students does not support the evidence provided or the evidence is inconsistent and/or
incompatible with other findings. The deficiencies identified are such as to give rise to serious concern and will require an immediate action
plan from the provider. The consequences of not meeting a Requirement in terms of the overall sufficiency of a programme will depend upon
the compliance of the provider across the range of Requirements and the possible implications for public protection”
5.

Inspection reports highlight areas of strength and draw attention to areas requiring improvement and development, including actions that
are required to be undertaken by the provider. Where an action is needed for a Requirement to be met, the term ‘must’ is used to describe
the obligation on the provider to undertake this action. For these actions the inspectors may stipulate a specific timescale by which the
action must be completed or when an update on progress must be provided. In their observations on the content of the report, the provider
should confirm the anticipated date by which these actions will be completed. Where an action would improve how a Requirement is met,
the term ‘should’ is used and for these actions there will be no due date stipulated. Providers will be asked to report on the progress in
addressing the required actions through the annual monitoring process. Serious concerns about a lack of progress may result in further
inspections or other quality assurance activity.

6.

The QA team aims to send an initial draft of the inspection report to the provider within two months of the conclusion of the inspection. The
provider of the qualification has the opportunity to provide factual corrections on the draft report. Following the production of the final report
the provider is asked to submit observations on, or objections to, the report and the actions listed. Where the inspection panel have
recommended that the programme is sufficient for registration, the Council of the GDC have delegated responsibility to the GDC Registrar
to consider the recommendations of the panel. Should an inspection panel not be able to recommend ‘sufficiency’ or ‘approval’, the report
and observations would be presented to the Council of the GDC for consideration.

7.

The final version of the report and the provider’s observations are published on the GDC website.

18

