INSPECTION REPORT
Awarding Body:

Manchester Metropolitan University

Education Provider:

Manchester Metropolitan University (BSc)
The City of Liverpool College (FdSc)
Birmingham Metropolitan College (FdSc)

Programme / Award /
Qualification:

BSc (Hons) Dental Technology
Foundation Degree (FdSc) in Dental Technology

Remit and Purpose:

Full inspection referencing the Standards for
Education to determine the continuing
sufficiency of the award for the purpose of
registration with the GDC as a dental technician

Learning Outcomes:

Preparing for Practice (Dental Technology)

Programme Inspection Dates:

23, 24, 25 & 26 February 2015

Examination Inspection
Dates:

7, 8, 12, 13 & 14 May 2015 – Examinations
17 & 18 June 2015 - Examination Board Meeting

Inspection Panel:

Michael McCulley (Chair and Lay Member)
Caroline Logan (DCP Member)
Christopher Parker (DCP Member)
Janine Brooks (Dentist Member)

GDC Staff:

James Marshall (Lead)
Luke Melia

Outcome:

Recommended that the BSc (Hons) and FdSc
Dental Technology programmes awarded by
Manchester Metropolitan University are
approved for the cohorts graduating in 2015
only. The GDC should re-inspect in 2016.

Inspection summary
Throughout the inspection of the BSc (Hons) and FdSc in dental technology programmes
awarded by Manchester Metropolitan University (MMU) the panel identified a number of
concerns. A significant area of concern for the panel was the level of oversight that
Manchester Metropolitan University maintained over the City of Liverpool College and
Birmingham Metropolitan College, the partner colleges providing the foundation degree
programmes. The panel was unable to identify a clear channel of communication between
MMU and the partner colleges leading the panel to be concerned that, should any problems
arise with the running of the programmes, they would not be appropriately escalated.
The panel was disappointed that a lack of communication from MMU was a common theme
in the feedback from the partner colleges. In addition to an unclear hierarchy for raising
concerns from the partner colleges, the panel identified there was a limited amount of
feedback sought from the programme leads in Liverpool and Birmingham with regards to the
general running of the programmes. The panel agreed that the knowledge and experience
from staff members at the partner colleges could be better utilised in future developments of
the programmes.
The panel was disappointed, through the initial planning and preparation for the inspection
visits, that there was a distinct lack of engagement from the programme leads at Manchester
Metropolitan University with the GDC. The panel struggled to obtain the relevant preinspection documentation with the final paperwork received by the GDC only three weeks in
advance of the inspection. The panel agreed that this was another example of the poor
communication from the programme leads.
Another area of concern for the panel was the lack of evidence during the initial programme
inspection visit that the students on both BSc and FdSc programmes at MMU and
Birmingham Metropolitan College would meet the GDC learning outcomes dedicated to the
design and manufacture of dental devices. Due to the lack of evidence, the panel was
concerned that the students, on completing the programme, run the risk of manufacturing
potentially unsafe dental devices.
As a result of the panel’s concerns, the GDC was required to formally write to the Head of
School at Manchester Metropolitan University to request additional evidence of the
manufacture and assessment of practical work to be completed by the examination
inspection. The panel was satisfied that Manchester and Liverpool complied with the GDC’s
request, however the inspectors were disappointed that the programme leads in Birmingham
did not provide this additional evidence until several weeks after the deadline.
The panel was also concerned with the level of marking compensation that has been
prevalent during the practical assessments. The panel discussed several specific areas of
compensation, firstly the ability for a student to pass an overall practical assessment, despite
a dental device not being safe for patient use due to the marking of individual component
parts of a device with no global mark for clinical acceptability. Secondly, a student could
pass the final practical examination yet fail the practical coursework, allowing a student to
pass overall due to the marking compensation used. The panel felt this was a particular
concern to both patient safety and the student learning experience. However, the panel was
pleased that staff from the Centre for Academic Standards and Quality Enhancement
(CASQE) have agreed to review this approach.
The panel also felt there was a varying opportunity for students to obtain practical
experience, depending on which institution they were studying at. The panel had no

concerns with the practical experience gained at the City of Liverpool College as all of the
students were required to be employed at dental laboratories throughout the duration of the
part-time programme. It was the panel’s belief that this enabled students to gain valuable, on
the job, practical experience outside of the college underpinned by the simulated work
undertaken at the college.
Students studying the BSc at Manchester Metropolitan University were also able to gain
practical experience while undertaking placements at the Manchester Dental Hospital
although this was of a fairly limited duration and scope of practice. The panel was
concerned that students studying at Birmingham Metropolitan College could progress
through their course without having made a dental device for a patient, due to the lack of
placements available. The inspectors were reassured that, following the programme
inspection visit, that the programme leads in Birmingham have agreed to review this
approach.
The panel wishes to thank the staff, students, and external stakeholders involved with the
BSc (Hons) and FdSc in Dental Technology programmes for their co-operation and
assistance with the inspection.

Inspection process and purpose of Inspection
1.

As part of its duty to protect patients and promote high standards within the professions
it regulates, the General Dental Council (GDC) quality assures the education and
training of student dentists and dental care professionals (DCPs) at institutions whose
qualifications enable the holder to apply for registration with the GDC and new
qualifications where it is intended that the qualification will lead to registration.

2.

The aim of this quality assurance activity is to ensure that these institutions produce a
new registrant who has demonstrated, on graduation, that he or she has met the
outcomes required for registration with the GDC. This is to ensure that students who
obtain a qualification leading to registration are fit to practise at the level of a safe
beginner.

3.

The inspection focuses on four Standards, with a total of 29 underlying Requirements.
These are contained in the document Standards for Education.

4.

The purpose of this inspection was to make a recommendation to the Council of the
GDC regarding the ‘sufficiency’ of the programme for registration as a dental technician
in the UK. The GDC’s powers are derived under Part II, Section 9 of the Dentists Act
1984 (as amended) to determine sufficiency of the programme.

5.

Inspection reports may highlight areas of strength and draw attention to areas requiring
improvement and development, including actions that are required to be undertaken by
the provider. Where an action is needed for a Requirement to be met, the term ‘must’ is
used to describe the obligation on the provider to undertake this action. For these
actions the inspectors may stipulate a specific timescale by which the action must be
completed or when an update on progress must be provided. In their observations on
the content of the report, the provider should confirm the anticipated date by which
these actions will be completed. Where an action would improve how a Requirement is
met, the term ‘should’ is used and for these actions there will be no due date stipulated.
Providers will be asked to report on the progress in addressing the required actions
through the annual monitoring process. Serious concerns about a lack of progress may
result in further inspections or other quality assurance activity.

6.

The provider of the qualification has the opportunity to provide factual corrections on the
draft report. Following the production of the final report the provider is asked to submit
observations on, or objections to, the report and the actions listed. Where the inspection
panel have recommended that the programme is sufficient for registration, the Council
of the GDC have delegated responsibility to the GDC Registrar to consider the
recommendations of the panel. Should an inspection panel not be able to recommend
sufficiency, the report and observations would be presented to the Council of the GDC
for consideration.

The Inspection
7.

This report sets out the findings of an inspection of the BSc (Hons) in Dental Technology
awarded and delivered by Manchester Metropolitan University and the Foundation
Degree (FdSc) in Dental Technology awarded by Manchester Metropolitan University
and delivered by the City of Liverpool College and Birmingham Metropolitan College.
The GDC publication Standards for Education (version 1.0 November 2012) was used
as a framework for the inspection.

8.

The inspection was comprised of four visits. The first, referred to as the programme
inspection, was carried out on 23, 24, 25 and 26 February 2015. This involved a series
of meetings with programme staff involved in the management, delivery and
assessment of the programme and a selection of the students across the three
education institutes delivering the programmes. The second visit took place on the 7
and 8 May 2015 during which the panel attended the student practical examinations at
Manchester Metropolitan University. The third visit took place on 12, 13 and 14 May
2015 during which the panel attended the student practical examinations at the City of
Liverpool College and Birmingham Metropolitan College. The final visit took place on 17
and 18 June at Manchester Metropolitan University during which the panel attended the
examination board meeting.

9.

The report contains the findings of the inspection panel across the four visits and with
consideration to supporting documentation prepared by the School to evidence how the
individual Requirements under the Standards for Education have been met.

Overview of Qualification
10. The BSc (Hons) in Dental Technology programme sits within the Manchester
Metropolitan University School of Healthcare Science. The programme has an annual
current and projected intake of 60 students. The duration of the programme is three
years full time teaching and assessment. The FdSc in Dental Technology is awarded by
Manchester Metropolitan University and delivered by the City of Liverpool College and
Birmingham Metropolitan College. The duration of the FdSc programme is either two
years full time teaching and assessment or three years part time teaching and
assessment. The City of Liverpool College has a current intake of 13 part time students
and Birmingham Metropolitan College has a current intake of 28 full time students and 7
part time students.
11. The BSc (Hons) in Dental Technology programme is taught over three years. During
the first year students are taught the units Introduction to Dental Technology, Dental
Biosciences and Quantitative Methods, Introduction to Dental Materials Science and
Introductory to Dental Laboratory Techniques. In the second year students are taught

the units Principles of Dental Technology, Dental Biosciences and Professionalism,
Dental Materials Science and Applied Dental Laboratory Techniques. In year three
students are taught the units Further Studies in Dental Technology, Research and
Professional Practice, Further Studies in Dental Materials and Case Based Learning.
12. The FdSc in Dental Technology programme, taught over either two or three years,
covers the following units: Introduction to Dental Technology, Dental Biosciences and
Quantitative Methods, Introduction to Dental Materials Science, Introductory Dental
Laboratory Techniques, Principles of Dental Technology, Dental Biosciences and
Professionalism, Dental Materials Science, Applied Dental Laboratory Techniques and
Work Based Learning.
13. The programme had been designed to meet the learning outcomes in GDC curriculum
document, Preparing for Practice, which was published in late 2011.

Evaluation of Qualification against the Standards for Education
14. As stated above, the Standards for Education were used as a framework for this
inspection.
15. The provider was requested to undertake a self-evaluation of the programme against
the individual Requirements under the Standards for Education. This involved stating
whether each Requirement is met, partly met or not met and to provide evidence in
support of their evaluation. The inspection panel examined this evidence, requested
further documentary evidence and gathered further evidence from discussions with staff
and students.
16. The inspection panel used the following descriptors to reach a decision on the extent to
which the BSc (Hons) in Dental Technology and the FdSc in Dental Technology
awarded by Manchester Metropolitan University meets each Requirement:
A Requirement is met if:
“There is sufficient appropriate evidence derived from the inspection process. This
evidence provides the inspectors with broad confidence that the provider demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students is supportive
of documentary evidence and the evidence is robust, consistent and not contradictory.
There may be minor deficiencies in the evidence supplied but these are likely to be
inconsequential.”
A Requirement is partly met if:
“Evidence derived from the inspection process is either incomplete or lacks detail and, as
such, fails to convince the inspection panel that the provider fully demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students may not fully
support the evidence submitted or there may be contradictory information in the evidence
provided. There is, however, some evidence of compliance and it is likely that either (a) the
appropriate evidence can be supplied in a short time frame, or, (b) any deficiencies
identified can be addressed and evidenced in the annual monitoring process.”
A Requirement is not met if:
“The provider cannot provide evidence to demonstrate a Requirement or the evidence
provided is not convincing. The information gathered at the inspection through meetings
with staff and students does not support the evidence provided or the evidence is

inconsistent and/or incompatible with other findings. The deficiencies identified are such as
to give rise to serious concern and will require an immediate action plan from the provider.
The consequences of not meeting a Requirement in terms of the overall sufficiency of a
programme will depend upon the compliance of the provider across the range of
Requirements and the possible implications for public protection.

Standard 1 – Protecting patients
Providers must be aware of their duty to protect the public. Providers must ensure that
patient safety is paramount and care of patients is of an appropriate standard. Any risk
to the safety of patients and their care by students must be minimised
Requirements
Met
Partly Not
met
met
1. Students will provide patient care only when they have
demonstrated adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical

procedures, the student should be assessed as competent in
the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients
2. Patients must be made aware that they are being treated by
students and give consent



3. Students will only provide patient care in an environment
which is safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with
relevant legislation and requirements regarding patient care



4. When providing patient care and services, students are to be
supervised appropriately according to the activity and the
student’s stage of development.



5. Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained.
Clinical supervisors must have appropriate general or
specialist registration with a regulatory body



6. Students and those involved in the delivery of education and
training must be encouraged to raise concerns if they identify
any risks to patient safety



7. Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be
taken by the provider



8. Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and
apply as required. The content and significance of the student
fitness to practise procedures must be conveyed to students
and aligned to GDC student fitness to practise guidance. Staff
involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar
with the GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance.



GDC comments
Requirement 1: Students will provide patient care only when they have demonstrated
adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical procedures, the student should be
assessed as competent in the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients (Requirement Partly Met)
The panel acknowledged that the students, as trainee dental technicians, are not permitted to
directly treat patients and any devices that are made by a dental technician are required to be
biomechanically sound and subsequently must be reviewed and approved as clinically
acceptable by a registered dentist.
However, the inspectors were concerned that, on numerous occasions, they identified
students who had failed elements of practical work, thus rendering the device unfit for patient

use, but had ultimately passed the assessment by marking aggregation from other elements of
the unit assessment. The panel agreed that, while a dentist will be ultimately responsible for
ensuring the device is clinically acceptable, this approach to providing patient care could lead
to an unfair learning experience, resulting in a student assuming they are making appropriate
dental devices, when on balance this is not the case.
The panel was reassured that, on meeting representatives from the Manchester Metropolitan
University (MMU) Centre for Academic Standards and Quality Enhancement (CASQE) team,
the assurances given to require students to pass all elements of an assessment where clinical
acceptability of a dental device and patient safety is concerned, would ensure patient safety is
at the forefront of the programmes being delivered. The panel agreed that MMU must ensure
all students are aware of their responsibilities to patient safety and review the assessment of a
student’s practical work, when marking aggregation is utilised, to ensure unsafe devices are
not passed as clinically acceptable.
The panel was provided with evidence that during the first year of both the BSc and FdSc
programmes, students are required to undertake modules including Introduction to Dental
Technology, Introduction to Dental Materials Science and Introduction to Dental Laboratory
Techniques. The panel agreed that on successful completion of these modules, students
would have gained a basic knowledge and understanding of the key themes and techniques of
the role of a dental technician.
Requirement 2: Patients must be made aware that they are being treated by students
and give consent (Requirement Met)
The panel was informed that only students on the MMU BSc in dental technology programme
come into contact with patients during their placement at the Manchester Dental Hospital.
Students on the FdSc programmes in Liverpool and Birmingham do not have the opportunity
to gain experience in a similar setting.
The BSc students from MMU act as observers whilst undergraduate dental students carry out
clinical treatments at Manchester Dental Hospital. The students are then given the opportunity
to undertake the laboratory work, as part of the patients’ treatment programme. All patients
receiving treatment at the dental hospital are required to give consent that they are being
treated by students and the panel was provided with evidence from Manchester Dental
Hospital that this takes place.
Requirement 3: Students will only provide patient care in an environment which is safe
and appropriate. The provider must comply with relevant legislation and requirements
regarding patient care (Requirement Partly Met)
The panel was satisfied that the facilities for students to undertake their practical experience at
MMU, the City of Liverpool College and Birmingham Metropolitan College meet this
requirement. In addition to this, students on the BSc programme who undertake their practice
placement at the Manchester Dental Hospital are provided with an induction prior to attending
the placement.
The panel understands that the use of practice placements at Birmingham Metropolitan
College is still in its infancy and was pleased to see, during the examination inspection, that
the programme leads were making progress with providing placements for students in future
cohorts. Manchester Metropolitan University and Birmingham Metropolitan College must
ensure that all practice placements for students on the FdSc programme are undertaken in a
safe and appropriate environment and keep an accurate and contemporaneous record of this.

Requirement 4: When providing patient care and services, students are to be
supervised appropriately according to the activity and the student’s stage of
development (Requirement Partly Met)
The panel was satisfied that the supervision the students receive in the on-site facilities at
MMU, Birmingham Metropolitan College and the City of Liverpool College was appropriate at
the time of the inspections. During the inspections the panel were given the opportunity to
meet students at all three providers who confirmed that help and support was readily available
when needed. In addition to this, when the BSc students undertake their placements at the
Manchester Dental Hospital, supervision is provided by the BDS and hospital clinical and
technical staff, should any issues arise.
The panel agreed, as noted in Requirement 3, that as the programme leads at Birmingham
Metropolitan College further develop their use of practice placements, due attention should be
given to ensuring an appropriate level of supervision is provided to students. Manchester
Metropolitan University and Birmingham Metropolitan College must ensure that the
supervision of students during their placements is of an appropriate level according to the
student’s stage of development.
Requirement 5: Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained. Clinical
supervisors must have appropriate general or specialist registration with a regulatory
body (Requirement Met)
The panel was provided with, and satisfied by, the evidence provided from Manchester
Metropolitan University, that all supervisory staff members involved in the BSc and FdSc
programmes who are required to teach practical aspects of the courses have appropriate GDC
registration.
In addition to this, the panel was satisfied that when the BSc students undertake their practice
placements at the Manchester Dental Hospital they are supervised by registered NHS or
University of Manchester staff members.
Requirement 6: Students and those involved in the delivery of education and training
must be encouraged to raise concerns if they identify any risks to patient safety
(Requirement Met)
When students start either the BSc or FdSc programmes, they are provided with a pack of
information, which includes details on the GDC’s ‘Principles of Raising Concerns’ document.
In addition to this, the student handbook provides details of where to find fitness to practice
information on the GDC’s website.
The panel was also informed that as part of the modules Principles of Dental Technology and
Dental Biosciences and Professionalism, which both the BSc and FdSc students are required
to complete, students are taught about the importance of raising concerns. This information is
also made available on the Moodle website, which students have access to.
Requirement 7: Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be taken by
the provider (Requirement Met)
As noted above in Requirement 1, the panel acknowledged that the students, as trainee dental
technicians, are not permitted to directly treat patients and any devices that are made by a
dental technician are required to be biomechanically sound and subsequently must be
reviewed and approved as clinically acceptable by a dentist. The panel, therefore, appreciates
that it is highly unlikely that the education providers would be required to manage a patient
safety issue relating to the dental technology programmes.

The panel was reassured that, in the event of a patient safety issue arising while a BSc
student is undertaking their practice placement at the Manchester Dental Hospital, there were
appropriate mechanisms of communication to ensure that the programme leads at Manchester
Metropolitan University would be informed of any issues.
Requirement 8: Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and apply as
required. The content and significance of the student fitness to practise procedures
must be conveyed to students and aligned to GDC student fitness to practise guidance.
Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar with the GDC Student
Fitness to Practise Guidance (Requirement Met)
The panel was provided with evidence of the providers’ fitness to practise policy in the form of
the Institutional Policy of Professional Suitability. The panel was satisfied that this policy
would ensure any student fitness to practise issue would be managed appropriately. In
addition to this, all students are provided with details of the GDC’s Student Fitness to Practise
Guidance in the student handbook and on the online Moodle system.
Actions
Req.
Actions for the provider
Number
1
Manchester Metropolitan University must ensure all students are
aware of their responsibilities to patient safety and review the
assessment of a student’s practical work, when marking
aggregation is utilised, to ensure unsafe devices are not passed
as clinically acceptable.

Due date
(if applicable)
Update to be
provided
during the
2016
programme
re-inspection

3

Manchester Metropolitan University and Birmingham
Metropolitan College must ensure that all practice placements for
students on the BSc and FdSc programme are undertaken in a
safe and appropriate environment and keep an accurate and
contemporaneous record of this.

Update to be
provided
during the
2016
programme
re-inspection

4

Manchester Metropolitan University and Birmingham
Metropolitan College must ensure that the supervision of
students during their placements is of an appropriate level
according to the student’s stage of development.

Update to be
provided
during the
2016
programme
re-inspection

Standard 2 – Quality evaluation and review of the programme
The provider must have in place effective policy and procedures for the monitoring and
review of the programme
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
9. The provider will have a framework in place that details how it
manages the quality of the programme which includes

making appropriate changes to ensure the curriculum
continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and
adapts to changing legislation and external guidance. There
must be a clear statement about where responsibility lies for
this function


10. The provider will have systems in place to quality assure
placements
11. Any problems identified through the operation of the quality
management framework must be addressed as soon as
possible



12. Should quality evaluation of the programme identify any
serious threats to the students achieving learning outcomes
through the programme, the GDC must be notified at the
earliest possible opportunity





13. Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external
quality assurance procedures
14. External examiners must be utilised and must be familiar with
the learning outcomes and their context. Providers should
follow QAA guidelines on external examining where
applicable
15. Providers must consider and, where appropriate, act upon
concerns raised or formal reports on the quality of education
and assessment





GDC comments
Requirement 9: The provider will have a framework in place that details how it manages
the quality of the programme which includes making appropriate changes to ensure the
curriculum continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and adapts to
changing legislation and external guidance. There must be a clear statement about
where responsibility lies for this function (Requirement Partly Met)
The panel had significant concerns that the framework that is currently in place at Manchester
Metropolitan University, as the awarding body, to manage the franchise FdSc dental
technology programmes at the City of Liverpool College and Birmingham Metropolitan College
was inadequate. The panel was concerned that, historically and at the time of the programme
inspection, there was a severe lack of clarity as to how any issues or problems relating to the
delivery of the programme in Liverpool or Birmingham would be reported to the programme
leads at Manchester Metropolitan University. The panel noted that not only was there a lack of
evidence provided to the panel as to how quality management concerns at the franchise
colleges would be escalated, this sentiment was echoed by the programme leads in both
Liverpool and Birmingham. The panel agreed that this hands-off approach to quality

management of the partner colleges was not viable and Manchester Metropolitan University
must review the quality management framework for its foundation degree programmes to
ensure there is a clear and workable mechanism for managing these programmes.
One main area of concern among the panel members was the near complete lack of
communication between the programme leads at Manchester Metropolitan University and the
partner colleges in Liverpool and Birmingham. The panel was informed by the staff in
Liverpool and Birmingham that there can be significant lapses of time between any
communications from MMU, raising the concern that if there were areas of concern regarding
the running of the programmes, MMU, as the awarding body, would not be aware of them.
The panel was pleased to be informed by the franchise colleges that since the initial GDC
programme inspection at the start of 2015, there has been an improvement in communication,
however the panel agreed that Manchester Metropolitan University must continue to develop
communication between the providers to ensure there is an open channel of communication
for the prompt resolution of any issues or concerns.
The panel was satisfied that the quality management framework and processes that are
currently in place at Manchester Metropolitan University to manage its own BSc dental
technology programme were appropriate and would ensure that the School is able to act on
any concerns with the running of the programme in a timely fashion. The panel agreed that
from the evidence provided, there were sufficient processes in place to manage both major
and minor changes to the programme. The panel also agreed that the Centre for Academic
Standards and Quality Enhancement (CASQE) provides a good tool for the School to use to
ensure its policies and procedures are accurate and work efficiently. However, the panel felt
that Manchester Metropolitan University should make better use of the resources it has to hand
in the form of CASQE, to review the quality management framework concerns regarding the
partner colleges, as noted above.
Requirement 10: The provider will have systems in place to quality assure placements
(Requirement Partly Met)
The panel was provided with evidence of a number of policies and procedures, maintained by
Manchester Metropolitan University that ensures there is a quality management framework for
practice placements that are run by the university. The panel was provided with copies of the
Institute Code of Practice on Placement Learning, Placement Health and Safety Assessment
and guidance for employers providing the practice placement. In addition to this, the panel
was given examples of letters that are sent to employers and record logs of the placement,
which the student must complete as part of the programme. The panel was satisfied that the
quality assurance of placements for the BSc dental technology students at MMU was
sufficient.
The panel appreciates that practice placements for FdSc students at Birmingham Metropolitan
College are a recent addition to the programme, following the initial GDC inspection visits and
the panel is pleased that the School is making progress in developing practice placements to
ensure students get sufficient practical experience during the programme. However, the panel
was concerned that was limited quality assurance of the current placements and the quality
assurance that currently takes place appeared to be on an informal basis. The panel agreed
that both Manchester Metropolitan University and Birmingham Metropolitan College must
ensure that there is a formal and rigorous system in place to quality assure placements for the
foundation degree students.
Requirement 11: Any problems identified through the operation of the quality
management framework must be addressed as soon as possible (Requirement Partly
Met)

The panel was reassured, as noted above in Requirement 9, that there are sufficient quality
management processes in place at Manchester Metropolitan University to ensure that any
problems that are identified with the running of the BSc in dental technology programme
would be addressed in a timely fashion. The panel acknowledged that the oversight and
guidance provided by the Centre for Academic Standards and Quality Enhancement
(CASQE) ensured that the quality management framework would be followed.
However, as noted above, the panel was concerned that, at present, the quality
management framework does not appear to sufficiently encompass the FdSc dental
technology programmes that are provided at the City of Liverpool College and Birmingham
Metropolitan College. The panel was also concerned that the poor communication
between MMU and the partner colleges renders any quality management framework
ineffective. The panel agreed that the programme leads could utilise the resources
available at CASQE to ensure guidance and best practice on managing quality
management issues are dealt with in an appropriate timeframe. Manchester Metropolitan
University, the City of Liverpool College and Birmingham Metropolitan College must ensure
there is an appropriate quality management framework in place to insure problems are
addressed as soon as possible.
Requirement 12: Should quality evaluation of the programme identify any serious
threats to the students achieving learning outcomes through the programme, the GDC
must be notified at the earliest possible opportunity (Requirement Partly Met)
The panel acknowledged that Manchester Metropolitan University has not yet been required to
inform the GDC due to a serious threat to students achieving the learning outcomes through
the programme and agreed that in the event of such a situation, CASQE would be in a position
to provide advice on any next steps.
The panel also agreed with the School’s acknowledgement that it would be appropriate to
develop a process and guidelines for use at a local level, should a serious threat to the
programme be identified. In addition to this, the panel agreed that the Manchester
Metropolitan University must ensure that a process and guidance is developed for use at a
local level and for the foundation degree programmes, to enable the GDC to be informed of
any serious threats to students achieving the learning outcomes.
Requirement 13: Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external quality
assurance procedures (Requirement Partly Met)
The panel was informed that there are a number of mechanisms through which both internal
and external quality assurance at Manchester Metropolitan University is provided. At a
programme level, the School is required to comply with the Continuous Improvement Plan,
which is discussed at each Programme Committee meeting and monitors the performance of
the programme. The panel was provided with a copy of the latest Continuous Improvement
Plan from January 2015. At a unit level, unit leaders are required to complete a CMI4 form at
the end of each academic year. This form contains unit performance data, a summary of
feedback from institutional surveys, any identified good practice, as well as reporting issues
that have arisen, which can then be included in the Continuous Improvement Plan.
Feedback on the programmes is also provided via the Staff Student Liaison Committee, which
meets each term. The panel was pleased to be informed that there are student
representatives from the BSc dental technology programme and FdSc programmes, however
the panel was unclear how much influence the students at the City of Liverpool College and
Birmingham Metropolitan College would have, with consideration to the lack of communication
between programme leads at the three institutions. In future, the panel agreed that

Manchester Metropolitan University must actively seek student feedback from the BSc and
FdSc dental technology programmes.
The panel was informed that, in addition to the internal quality assurance procedures, the
School utilises External Examiners, with whom the panel had an opportunity to interview
during the inspection process.
Requirement 14: External examiners must be utilised and must be familiar with the
learning outcomes and their context. Providers should follow QAA guidelines on
external examining where applicable (Requirement Met)
During the inspection process the panel was provided with evidence of Manchester
Metropolitan University’s Institutional Code of Practice on External Examining, the External
Examiner Handbook and were given an overview of External Examining at MMU. The
university code of practice details the roles and responsibilities of an External Examiner and is
in line with QAA guidelines.
The panel noted that External Examiners of the BSc and FdSc programmes moderate
examination papers, interview students, review practical assessment work and provide
feedback at the examination board. External Examiners are also required to provide written
reports, of which the panel was provided examples. The panel was pleased to be informed
that, in terms of transparency, all External Examiner reports are made available on the Moodle
website for students to review.
Requirement 15: Providers must consider and, where appropriate, act upon concerns
raised or formal reports on the quality of education and assessment (Requirement
Partly Met)
As noted in Requirement 13, Manchester Metropolitan University utilises a Student Staff
Liaison Committee, where concerns from student representatives can be raised. The panel
was provided with minutes of recent Staff Student Liaison Committee meetings to evidence
this.
As discussed further in Standard 3 of this report, during the course of the inspection of the
dental technology programmes at MMU, the City of Liverpool College and Birmingham
Metropolitan College, the GDC was required to write to the programme leads to request that
the students provide evidence of additional practical work to demonstrate the attainment of
practical experience in manufacturing fixed, removable and orthodontic dental devices. The
panel was satisfied that both Manchester Metropolitan University and the City of Liverpool
complied with the GDC’s request for additional practical work.
However, the panel was sincerely disappointed that staff at Birmingham Metropolitan College
failed to grasp the importance of this request and did not provide the requested additional
practical work during the examination inspection visit. The panel was required to wait until the
Examination Board meeting to see this work. The panel agreed that this approach from
Birmingham Metropolitan College evidenced both a lack of appreciation to act upon concerns
raised on the quality of education and assessment and a lack of oversight from Manchester
Metropolitan University to ensure that all providers of the dental technology programmes
complied with the request from the GDC. The panel agreed that Birmingham Metropolitan
College must develop processes to ensure that all concerns raised on the quality of education
and assessment are acted upon. Additionally, Manchester Metropolitan University must
ensure that they have oversight of, and act upon, concerns raised at the providers of the FdSc
dental technology programmes.

Actions
Req.
Number
9

Actions for the provider
Manchester Metropolitan University must review the quality
management framework for its foundation degree programmes
to ensure there is a clear and workable mechanism for
managing these programmes.

Due date
(if applicable)
Update to be
provided
during the
2016
programme reinspection

9

Manchester Metropolitan University must continue to develop
communication between the colleges to ensure there is an open
channel of communication for the prompt resolution of any
issues or concerns.

Update to be
provided
during the
2016
programme reinspection

9

Manchester Metropolitan University should make better use of
the resources it has to hand in the form of CASQE, to review the
quality management framework concerns regarding the partner
colleges

Update to be
provided
during the
2016
programme reinspection

10

Manchester Metropolitan University and Birmingham
Metropolitan College must ensure that there is a formal and
rigorous system in place to quality assure placements for the
foundation degree students.

Update to be
provided
during the
2016
programme reinspection

11

Manchester Metropolitan University, the City of Liverpool
College and Birmingham Metropolitan College must ensure
there is an appropriate quality management framework in place
to insure problems are addressed as soon as possible.

Update to be
provided
during the
2016
programme reinspection

12

Manchester Metropolitan University must ensure that a process
and guidance is developed for use at a local level and for the
foundation degree programmes, to enable the GDC to be
informed of any serious threats to students achieving the
learning outcomes.

Update to be
provided
during the
2016
programme reinspection

13

Manchester Metropolitan University must actively seek student
feedback from the BSc and FdSc dental technology
programmes.

Update to be
provided
during the
2016
programme reinspection

15

Birmingham Metropolitan College must develop processes to
ensure that all concerns raised on the quality of education and
assessment are acted upon

Update to be
provided
during the
2016
programme reinspection

15

Manchester Metropolitan University must ensure that they have
oversight of, and act upon, concerns raised at the providers of
the FdSc dental technology programmes.

Update to be
provided
during the
2016
programme reinspection

Standard 3– Student assessment
Assessment must be reliable and valid. The choice of assessment method must be
appropriate to demonstrate achievement of the GDC learning outcomes. Assessors
must be fit to perform the assessment task
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
16. To award the qualification, providers must be assured that
students have demonstrated attainment across the full range

of learning outcomes, at a level sufficient to indicate they are
safe to begin practice. This assurance should be underpinned
by a coherent approach to aggregation and triangulation, as
well as the principles of assessment referred to in these
standards.
17. The provider will have in place management systems to plan,
monitor and record the assessment of students throughout
the programme against each of the learning outcomes
18. Assessment must involve a range of methods appropriate to
the learning outcomes and these should be in line with
current practice and routinely monitored, quality assured and
developed





19. Students will have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and will undertake each activity relating
to patient care on sufficient occasions to enable them to
develop the skills and the level of competency to achieve the
relevant GDC learning outcomes





20. The provider should seek to improve student performance by
encouraging reflection and by providing feedback 1.
21. Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills,
experience and training to undertake the task of assessment,
appropriate general or specialist registration with a regulatory
body
22. Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent
to which assessment processes are rigorous, set at the
correct standard, ensure equity of treatment for students and
have been fairly conducted





23. Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear
criteria. Standard setting must be employed for summative
assessments



24. Where appropriate, patient/peer/customer feedback
should contribute to the assessment process



25. Where possible, multiple samples of performance must
be taken to ensure the validity and reliability of the
assessment conclusion



1 Reflective practice should not be part of the assessment process in a way that risks effective student use

26. The standard expected of students in each area to be
assessed must be clear and students and staff involved
in assessment must be aware of this standard



GDC comments
Requirement 16: To award the qualification, providers must be assured that students
have demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes, at a level
sufficient to indicate they are safe to begin practice. This assurance should be
underpinned by a coherent approach to aggregation and triangulation, as well as the
principles of assessment referred to in these standards (Requirement Partly Met)
During the course of the programme inspection, the panel became increasingly concerned by
the lack of evidence to show that students on the BSc and FdSc programmes at Manchester
Metropolitan University and Birmingham Metropolitan College would adequately meet the GDC
learning outcomes, specifically relating to their practical work and the manufacture of dental
devices. The panel was not provided with sufficient evidence from Manchester and
Birmingham that the students had produced or had been assessed at a level sufficient to
indicate they were safe beginners, under the Manufacture of Custom Made Dental Devices
learning outcomes section of Preparing for Practice. In addition to this, the panel was informed
by several student groups across the MMU and Birmingham programmes that they had
concerns throughout the duration of their courses that there was not enough practical teaching,
leading to a significant lack of confidence amongst the student body and a general feeling that
there was a risk that a number of students would not reach the threshold of a safe beginner by
the time they graduate.
Further to the discussions held between staff members and students, the panel had specific
concerns regarding the following learning outcomes being suitably assessed:
1.14.1 Design, manufacture, assess and provide biomechanically sound removable devices
1.14.2 Design, manufacture, assess and provide biomechanically sound fixed prostheses
1.14.3 Design, manufacture, assess and provide biomechanically sound orthodontic
appliances
And:
1.15.1 Repair custom made dental devices to meet the needs of the patient
1.15.2 Repair and modify custom made dental devices
As a consequence of these concerns, the GDC wrote to the Head of School at Manchester
Metropolitan University on 6th March 2015 to request that, during the examination inspection
visits, the panel would be provided with evidence that all final year students, from the BSc and
FdSc programmes, had produced the following:
-

One full denture made and assessed to a clinically acceptable standard with supporting
documents
One partial denture made and assessed to a clinically acceptable standard with
supporting documents
One crown or bridge made and assessed to a clinically acceptable standard with
supporting documents
One orthodontic appliance made and assessed to a clinically acceptable standard with
supporting documents

As noted in Requirement 15, both Manchester Metropolitan University and the City of Liverpool
College were able to provide this additional evidence of student performance during the
examination inspection visits, enabling the panel to be satisfied that the students at these
providers had produced and gained practical experience in the above areas of dental
technology. The panel was, however, disappointed that Birmingham Metropolitan College
failed to provide the additional evidence for the examination inspection visit, with no clear
explanation for the delay. The panel was concerned that, as noted previously, this
demonstrates a lack of communication and management from Manchester Metropolitan
University, as the awarding body, to ensure each of the partner colleges complies with
regulatory body. The panel agreed that in future, Manchester Metropolitan University must
ensure that students on all dental technology programmes awarded by the University are able
to demonstrate attainment across the full range of learning outcomes and this must be
evidenced.
Requirement 17: The provider will have in place management systems to plan, monitor
and record the assessment of students throughout the programme against each of the
learning outcomes (Requirement Partly Met)
As acknowledged by programme staff at Manchester Metropolitan University in their preinspection documentation, the School currently utilises an informal method for planning the
assessment strategy for each unit at the beginning of the academic year. As part of the
current process, a discussion is held amongst curriculum staff before the academic year
begins, during which the assessments for the unit are planned and in the event that any
changes are required following the previous year’s assessments, these are submitted in line
with the minor change process, as noted in Requirement 9. The panel was informed that when
assessment dates have been finalised they are published on the Moodle website for students
to access. The panel agreed that Manchester Metropolitan University must continue to
develop a formal process for the planning and management of assessments on the BSc and
FdSc dental technology programmes.
On completion of an assessment or when a piece of coursework has been submitted, the
marks are uploaded onto Moodle and also the university’s QLS database, which is the
management software that records student marks and generates data for the exam boards.
The panel was informed that MMU has a commitment to mark assessments and return
feedback within four weeks.
The panel did, however, have concerns regarding the timing of practical coursework
submissions. During the examination inspection at Birmingham Metropolitan College, the
inspectors were informed that elements of the practical coursework were not due to be
submitted until after the final practical examination had taken place. The panel felt that this
was an unfair approach as students were not able to learn from any mistakes they had made
through their coursework in order to remedy this for the final assessment. The panel agreed
that Manchester Metropolitan University must review the process for setting coursework and
practical examination dates across all its dental technology programmes.
Requirement 18: Assessment must involve a range of methods appropriate to the
learning outcomes and these should be in line with current practice and routinely
monitored, quality assured and developed (Requirement Met)
During the inspection the panel was provided with evidence of the range of assessments that
are currently utilised for both the BSc and FdSc dental technology programmes at Manchester
Metropolitan University, the City of Liverpool College and Birmingham Metropolitan College.
The panel agreed that the range of methods of assessments used were appropriate to the
learning outcomes. The panel was satisfied that the oversight from the Centre for Academic

Standards and Quality Enhancement would ensure that assessments are routinely monitored,
quality assured and developed.
Requirement 19: Students will have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and will undertake each activity relating to patient care on
sufficient occasions to enable them to develop the skills and the level of competency to
achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes (Requirement Partly Met)
The panel was concerned that across Manchester Metropolitan University, the City of Liverpool
College and Birmingham Metropolitan College, there was a distinct difference in the exposure
a student would have when undertaking practical work. The panel was impressed with the
approach taken in Liverpool during the part-time FdSc programme where all students are
required to be employed in a dental laboratory during their studies. This method of learning
enabled the students to learn new skills during their time at the college and then have the
opportunity to practice these skills in their work placement. The view of the panel was
reinforced during meetings with the students in Liverpool, who were, overall, satisfied with the
amount of practical work they were undertaking on the course.
The panel was more concerned with the experience students were gaining in Manchester and,
more acutely, Birmingham. The inspectors agreed that enabling students at MMU to
undertake a work placement at the Manchester Dental Hospital not only ensured the students
had a practical hands-on experience preparing dental devices for patients attending the
hospital, but it also helped foster better team working between the trainee dental technicians
and other members of the dental team.
The panel also had concerns with the approach taken in Birmingham, where the inspectors
were informed that it is possible for a student to go through the entire programme without
making a dental device for a patient and only having used simulated patient models. The
panel was pleased to be informed during the examination inspection in Birmingham that the
programme leads had started researching practice placements for their students for future
cohorts. The panel agreed that Manchester Metropolitan University must ensure all students
have an equal opportunity to gain practical experience, regardless of the education provider.
In addition to this the panel agreed that Birmingham Metropolitan College must continue to
work towards implementing practical placements for their foundation degree students.
Requirement 20: The provider should seek to improve student performance by
encouraging reflection and by providing feedback (Requirement Partly Met)
The panel understands that Manchester Metropolitan University has a commitment to provide
feedback to students following submission of summative work within four weeks. In addition to
this, the university also has an Institutional Code of Practice on Feedback, a copy of which was
made available to the panel.
While the panel agreed that the university has made a positive step by producing the
commitment and code of practice, the inspectors felt that in light of the average rating from
students on feedback in the latest internal student survey, coupled with a lack of evidence
provided to the panel to show the School is complying with their commitment and code of
practice, this requirement can only be partly met. The panel also considered the lack of
reference to student reflection as a concern. The panel agreed that enabling students to
formally reflect on their performance would be of benefit. Manchester Metropolitan University
must ensure feedback is provided in a timely fashion and ensure students on both the BSc and
FdSc programmes have an opportunity to reflect on their performance.

Requirement 21: Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills, experience and
training to undertake the task of assessment, appropriate general or specialist
registration with a regulatory body (Requirement Partly Met)
The panel was satisfied that all members of staff who have a role in teaching practical
elements of the BSc and FdSc programmes across the three education providers were
registered with the GDC.
The inspectors were concerned, however, with the lack of evidence detailing how examiners
and assessors were trained and calibrated in advance of the practical assessments. The
panel agreed that Manchester Metropolitan University must ensure all staff members involved
in the assessment of students receive training and undertake calibration in advance of practical
assessments.
Requirement 22: Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent to
which assessment processes are rigorous, set at the correct standard, ensure equity of
treatment for students and have been fairly conducted (Requirement Met)
The panel was provided with copies of recent reports from the two External Examiners who
were responsible for the BSc and FdSc dental technology programmes awarded by
Manchester Metropolitan University. The panel was satisfied that the External Examiners are
given the opportunity to review examination papers, review examination scripts and
coursework and subsequently provide a verbal report to the examination board and a written
annual report, containing their findings. The panel agreed that the School and External
Examiners followed the university’s guidelines appropriately.
Requirement 23: Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear criteria.
Standard setting must be employed for summative assessments (Requirement Partly
Met)
The panel was concerned to see during the assessment of practical work that it is was possible
for a student to produce a potentially unsafe dental device, however pass overall due to the
marking aggregation that was involved. The panel was informed that, when producing a dental
device, each individual part of the manufacturing process was given a mark, with no overall
global score to determine whether or not the piece of work that had been produced was of a
biomechanically sound nature or fit for patient use. The panel was concerned that this
approach to marking could lead a student to believe, as they had passed the assessment, that
the dental device was fit for use. The panel considered this to be an unfair and potentially
unsafe approach to the marking of assessments.
Following the discovery of this area of concern, the panel met representatives from the
university’s Centre for Academic Standards and Quality Enhancement (CASQE), who
reassured the inspectors that for future assessments of practical work where patient safety is
of concern, an overall mark of clinical suitability will be awarded. In the event that a student
produces a device that does not meet this new criteria, the student will fail the assessment.
The panel agreed with this approach and that Manchester Metropolitan University must ensure
that the marking aggregation on its BSc and FdSc programmes is not used to the detriment of
patient safety.
Despite the concerns raised above, that panel was pleased to see the developments that had
been made with the marking criteria used in the final practical assessments. The panel felt
that, providing the issue of ensuring a global clinical suitability mark was addressed and
adequate training is provided in the use of the documentation, the marking criteria was of a
good quality and ensured clarity for all assessors.

Requirement 24: Where appropriate, patient/peer/customer feedback should
contribute to the assessment process (Requirement Partly Met)
The panel understands that external stakeholders do not currently have a direct involvement in
the assessment process, however Manchester Metropolitan University does gain general
feedback from dental laboratory employers via the Dental Advisory Committee, of which the
panel was provided with minutes from recent meetings. While the panel acknowledged that
dental technicians have a limited involvement with patients, they agreed that in future,
Manchester Metropolitan University must work to ensure peer and customer feedback
contributes to the assessment process for students on the BSc and FdSc programmes.
Requirement 25: Where possible, multiple samples of performance must be taken to
ensure the validity and reliability of the assessment conclusion (Requirement Partly
Met)
The panel agreed that while multiple samples of a student’s performance were being taken,
they were concerned about the reliability of some assessment conclusions, as noted above in
Requirement 23. As an example, a student has the ability to undertake a practical assessment
and potentially manufacture a dental device which is not fit for patient use. However, because
of the making aggregation system that is currently employed by Manchester Metropolitan
University, a student may eventually pass this assessment, despite producing an unfit device.
The panel felt that there was a risk that if multiple samples of a student’s performance were
taken, while using a marking criteria that could mislead a student regarding the safety or
viability of the devices they have produced, the culmination could be an invalid or unreliable
assessment conclusion, not reflecting the true performance of the student. The panel agreed
that Manchester Metropolitan University must ensure that all assessment decisions are reliable
by reviewing the assessment marking criteria currently used.
Requirement 26: The standard expected of students in each area to be assessed must
be clear and students and staff involved in assessment must be aware of this standard
(Requirement Met)
During the programme inspection the panel was provided with a copy of the School of
Healthcare Science Assessment Criteria, of which all students and staff members are provided
copies of at the beginning of each academic year. The panel was satisfied that the criteria
provided in this document clearly demonstrates to both students and staff what standard is
required.
The panel was also provided with copies of the programme handbook in addition to each of the
unit handbooks. The panel was satisfied that this additional information would ensure students
are aware of what is required during each unit and what the end of unit assessments will
consist of.
Actions
Req.
Number
16

Actions for the provider

Manchester Metropolitan University must ensure that
students on all dental technology programmes awarded by
the University are able to demonstrate attainment across the
full range of learning outcomes and this must be evidenced.

Due date
(if applicable)
Update to be
provided
during the
2016
programme reinspection

17

Manchester Metropolitan University must continue to develop a
formal process for the planning and management of
assessments on the BSc and FdSc dental technology
programmes.

Update to be
provided
during the
2016
programme reinspection

17

Manchester Metropolitan University must review the process for
setting coursework and practical examination dates across all
its dental technology programmes.

Update to be
provided
during the
2016
programme reinspection

19

Manchester Metropolitan University must ensure all students
have an equal opportunity to gain practical experience,
regardless of the education provider.

Update to be
provided
during the
2016
programme reinspection

19

Birmingham Metropolitan College must continue to work
towards implementing practical placements for their foundation
degree students.

Update to be
provided
during the
2016
programme reinspection

20

Manchester Metropolitan University must ensure feedback is
provided in a timely fashion and ensure students on both the
BSc and FdSc programmes have an opportunity to reflect on
their performance.

Update to be
provided
during the
2016
programme reinspection

21

Manchester Metropolitan University must ensure all staff
members involved in the assessment of students receive
training and undertake calibration in advance of practical
assessments.

Update to be
provided
during the
2016
programme reinspection

23

Manchester Metropolitan University must ensure that the
marking aggregation on its BSc and FdSc programmes is not
used to the detriment of patient safety.

Update to be
provided
during the
2016
programme reinspection

24

Manchester Metropolitan University must work to ensure peer
and customer feedback contributes to the assessment process
for students on the BSc and FdSc programmes.

Update to be
provided
during the
2016

programme reinspection
25

Manchester Metropolitan University must ensure that all
assessment decisions are reliable by reviewing the assessment
marking criteria currently used.

Update to be
provided
during the
2016
programme reinspection

Standard 4 – Equality and diversity
The provider must comply with equal opportunities and discrimination legislation and
practice. They must also advocate this practice to students
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
27. Providers must adhere to current legislation and best
practice guidance relating to equality and diversity



28. Staff will receive training on equality and diversity,
development and appraisal mechanisms will include this



29. Providers will convey to students the importance of
compliance with equality and diversity law and principles of
the four UK nations both during training and after they begin
practice



GDC comments
Requirement 27: Providers must adhere to current legislation and best practice
guidance relating to equality and diversity (Requirement Partly Met)
The panel was provided with evidence of the Equality and Diversity Policy that is in place at
Manchester Metropolitan University. In addition to this the panel was provided with a copy of
the 2013 MMU Equality and Diversity Report.
During meetings with staff members responsible for equality and diversity issues at the City
of Liverpool College and Birmingham Metropolitan College, the panel was informed that each
college has local policies and procedures to ensure current legislation and best practice
guidance are followed.
While the panel was reassured that, on discussion with the franchise colleges, there were
equality and diversity policies in place, they remained concerned that there was a distinct
lack of oversight from MMU, as the awarding body, that each franchise institution would
remain abreast and up-to-date with current legislation and best practice. The panel agreed
that Manchester Metropolitan University must ensure that all franchise institutions it awards
qualifications for adhere to current legislation and best practice relating to equality and
diversity.
Requirement 28: Staff will receive training on equality and diversity, development and
appraisal mechanisms will include this (Requirement Partly Met)
The panel was pleased to be informed, during meetings in Manchester, Liverpool and
Birmingham that staff members at the three education providers delivering the dental
technology programmes are all provided with equality and diversity training. This training is
provided by the home education institution, rather than an overarching training package that
is delivered and monitored by MMU, the awarding body.
While the panel was pleased that this is currently taking place, the panel was concerned, as
noted above, that there has been a lack of oversight from MMU with regards to the running of
the programmes, resulting in the risk that in the event that the equality and diversity training
provided by the franchise colleges is insufficient, the awarding body will not be aware of this.
The panel agreed that Manchester Metropolitan University must ensure that all franchise
institutions it awards qualifications for provides adequate training on equality and diversity.

Requirement 29: Providers will convey to students the importance of compliance with
equality and diversity law and principles of the four UK nations both during training and
after they begin practice (Requirement Met)
During the course of both the FdSc in dental technology and the BSc in dental technology, all
students are required to undertake the module Dental Biosciences and Professionalism.
As part of this module, students are taught about ethics in dental, medical and scientific
practice discrimination acts, confidentiality, data protection, professional indemnity, liability and
responsibility. Students are assessed via both coursework and an online assessment for this
module. The panel agreed that on completion of this module students would understand the
importance of compliance with equality and diversity law and principles.

Actions
Req.
Number

Actions for the provider

Due date
(if applicable)

27

Manchester Metropolitan University must
ensure that all franchise institutions it awards
qualifications for adhere to current legislation
and best practice relating to equality and
diversity.

Update to be
provided
during the
2016
programme reinspection

28

Manchester Metropolitan University must
ensure that all franchise institutions it awards
qualifications for provides adequate training
on equality and diversity.

Update to be
provided
during the
2016
programme reinspection

Summary of Actions
Req.

Actions for the provider

Observations

Due date
(if applicable)

Response from the Provider
Provider to record observations in response to
actions here

1

Manchester Metropolitan University must ensure all
students are aware of their responsibilities to patient
safety and review the assessment of a student’s
practical work, when marking aggregation is utilised,
to ensure unsafe devices are not passed as clinically
acceptable.

Variation to regulations sought and approved to
ensure all sub-elements of practical work in the
final practical unit are passed. Only students
achieving this outcome PLUS successful
completion of all other aspects of the programme
will be forwarded to the GDC for consideration of
registration.

Update to be
provided during
the 2016
programme reinspection

3

Manchester Metropolitan University and Birmingham
Metropolitan College must ensure that all practice
placements for students on the BSc and FdSc
programme are undertaken in a safe and appropriate
environment and keep an accurate and
contemporaneous record of this.

BMET using locally developed protocol and the
MMU H&S Tripartite agreement forms and risk
management action plan forms for students
undertaking the work based learning unit
6H5Z1023 in 2015/2016. MMU to update records
for Manchester Dental School placements.

Update to be
provided during
the 2016
programme reinspection

4

Manchester Metropolitan University and
Birmingham Metropolitan College must ensure that
the supervision of students during their placements
is of an appropriate level according to the student’s
stage of development.
Manchester Metropolitan University must review the
quality management framework for its foundation

BMET to produce a document defining minimum
levels of supervision.

Update to be
provided during
the 2016
programme reinspection
Update to be
provided during

9

CASQE to undertake a review of the programmes
documented system in summer 2016.

9

degree programmes to ensure there is a clear and
workable mechanism for managing these
programmes.
Manchester Metropolitan University must continue to
develop communication between the colleges to
ensure there is an open channel of communication for
the prompt resolution of any issues or concerns.

Protocol established for lines of communication to
be developed. Regular meetings between MMU
and partner colleges established.

9

Manchester Metropolitan University should make
better use of the resources it has to hand in the form
of CASQE, to review the quality management
framework concerns regarding the partner colleges

CASQE to undertake review as described above.
Meetings have taken place with CASQE in relation
to development of action plan in response to last
GDC inspection.

10

Manchester Metropolitan University and Birmingham
Metropolitan College must ensure that there is a
formal and rigorous system in place to quality assure
placements for the foundation degree students.

BMET to establish and implement protocol to QA
placements. BMET to update MMU with details of
placements.

11

Manchester Metropolitan University, the City of
Liverpool College and Birmingham Metropolitan
College must ensure there is an appropriate quality
management framework in place to insure problems
are addressed as soon as possible.

Partner colleges to submit UIPs and CIPs in
accordance with MMU quality management
framework. These will be approved at the relevant
Programme Committee meeting. Link tutors to act
on student issues from their staff student liaison
committees and where applicable resolve prior to
the next scheduled Programme Committee. Report
to School Programme Committee. Outcomes to be
fed back to students to confirm closure of loop.

12

Manchester Metropolitan University must ensure that
a process and guidance is developed for use at a
local level and for the foundation degree programmes,
to enable the GDC to be informed of any serious
threats to students achieving the learning outcomes.

Review information from SSLC's, unit improvement
plans, continuous improvement plans and NSS to
provide data regards threats to students meeting
learning outcomes. Next review point is School
Programme Committee. Alongside this there will
be the development of a protocol for

the 2016
programme reinspection
Update to be
provided during
the 2016
programme reinspection
Update to be
provided during
the 2016
programme reinspection
Update to be
provided during
the 2016
programme reinspection
Update to be
provided during
the 2016
programme reinspection

Update to be
provided during
the 2016
programme reinspection

communication
circumstances.

to

the

GDC

in

these

13

Manchester Metropolitan University must actively
seek student feedback from the BSc and FdSc dental
technology programmes.

AT MMU recruitment of student representatives
begins at induction week. Training is provided by
the Student Union. Student’s reps attend the SSLC
and elect a representative to attend the programme
committee. Partner colleges will provide
documentation as to the processes involved at
their institutes re. obtaining the student voice. An
opportunity will be made available for students at
all institutions to meet with the External Examiners.

Update to be
provided during
the 2016
programme reinspection

15

Birmingham Metropolitan College must develop
processes to ensure that all concerns raised on the
quality of education and assessment are acted upon

BMET are developing protocols of their processes
of raising concerns on the quality of education and
assessment.

15

Manchester Metropolitan University must ensure that
they have oversight of, and act upon, concerns raised
at the providers of the FdSc dental technology
programmes.

See 15 above. Additionally, a protocol establishing
lines of communication between partner colleges
and MMU has been developed. Finally, partner
colleges to submit UIPs and CIPs to MMU for
approval.

Update to be
provided during
the 2016
programme reinspection
Update to be
provided during
the 2016
programme reinspection

16

Manchester Metropolitan University must ensure that
students on all dental technology programmes
awarded by the University are able to demonstrate
attainment across the full range of learning outcomes
and this must be evidenced.

1. Attainment of full range of learning outcomes
will be demonstrated by the combination of the
programmes’ dental laboratory practical units and
work based learning opportunities. In addition to
the programmes’ practical units:

Update to be
provided during
the 2016
programme reinspection

(a) BMET FdSc students will undertake the work
based learning unit 6H5Z1023 delivered by
placements offered by BMET.

(b) CoLC FdSc students study part-time mode
and undertake the work based learning unit
6H5Z1023 working in their employer's laboratory.
(c) MMU BSc students in-house practical unit is
supported by undertaking patient work at the
Manchester dental school and a 'preparing for
practice' module at MMU.
17

Manchester Metropolitan University must continue to
develop a formal process for the planning and
management of assessments on the BSc and FdSc
dental technology programmes.

A flowchart has been produced to illustrate the
planning and management of assessments.

17

Manchester Metropolitan University must review the
process for setting coursework and practical
examination dates across all its dental technology
programmes.

Dates for submission of CW are decided prior to
the start of the academic year ensuring no
bunching wherever possible. Exam dates are set
centrally but with the proviso that there are no
clashes between theory and practical exams.
Partner colleges adopt MMU theory exam dates.
Some variation in CoLC practical exam dates due
to p/t students.

19

Manchester Metropolitan University must ensure all
students have an equal opportunity to gain practical
experience, regardless of the education provider.

Please see requirement 16 above.

19

Birmingham Metropolitan College must continue to
work towards implementing practical placements for
their foundation degree students.

BMET have arranged placements for students.

20

Manchester Metropolitan University must ensure
feedback is provided in a timely fashion and ensure

At both MMU and partner colleges evidence will be
provided that provision of feedback complies with
institutional policies. With reference to practical

Update to be
provided during
the 2016
programme reinspection
Update to be
provided during
the 2016
programme reinspection

Update to be
provided during
the 2016
programme reinspection
Update to be
provided during
the 2016
programme reinspection
Update to be
provided during
the 2016

students on both the BSc and FdSc programmes
have an opportunity to reflect on their performance.

work, each institution offers continual verbal
feedback on formative tasks prior to submission of
summative coursework.

programme reinspection

21

Manchester Metropolitan University must ensure all
staff members involved in the assessment of students
receive training and undertake calibration in advance
of practical assessments.

A calibration meeting took place on the 15/2/16.
Training has commenced as well.

23

Manchester Metropolitan University must ensure that
the marking aggregation on its BSc and FdSc
programmes is not used to the detriment of patient
safety.

A variation to regulations of assessment now
ensures that all sub elements of coursework and
exams must be passed in the final practical unit.

24

Manchester Metropolitan University must work to
ensure peer and customer feedback contributes to the
assessment process for students on the BSc and
FdSc programmes.

Placement providers (for BMET and CoLC) to be
invited to join dental advisory panel to be held
16/3/16. Agenda will include ‘Assessment
Planning’ and ‘Feedback on Student performance
in the Workplace

Update to be
provided during
the 2016
programme reinspection
Update to be
provided during
the 2016
programme reinspection
Update to be
provided during
the 2016
programme reinspection

25

Manchester Metropolitan University must ensure that
all assessment decisions are reliable by reviewing the
assessment marking criteria currently used.

A review session involving all partners was held on
11/1/16 and marking criteria further discussed at a
triangulation meeting held on the 15/2/16.

27

Manchester Metropolitan University must ensure that
all franchise institutions it awards qualifications for
adhere to current legislation and best practice relating
to equality and diversity.

Partner institutions have provided evidence
regarding institutional policies on E&D training
procedures.

28

Manchester Metropolitan University must ensure that
all franchise institutions it awards qualifications for
provides adequate training on equality and diversity.

See above. Additionally, it will be investigated
whether MMU E&D team can verify that training at
partner institutions is adequate.

Update to be
provided during
the 2016
programme reinspection
Update to be
provided during
the 2016
programme reinspection
Update to be
provided during
the 2016
programme reinspection

Observations from the provider on content of report
Thank you for the final report of the above inspection. The university are pleased to see that all Standards are met or partially met. Equally,
the university are pleased that matters of accuracy as identified in response to your draft report have been rectified. The summary of the
report highlights a number of areas that require improvement – I am pleased to confirm that initiatives have been put into place that will
mitigate the concerns raised as described below.
Lack of oversight/communication with partner colleges
The School of Healthcare Science has instigated monthly meetings with our partner colleges to ensure that there is sustained communication
between them and ourselves. These meetings are minuted and appropriate actions identified and addressed. Furthermore, we have
developed a protocol that has been shared with our partner colleges. This details how programme related issues should be reported, and if
necessary, escalated.
Assessment of practical activities
The inspection team were concerned about the degree of compensation offered to students on the programme. The School are disappointed
regarding the use of the term compensation – we consider the term aggregation of marks to be more appropriate. However, we accept the
concerns raised and we have sought and obtained a variation to university assessment regulations that now require students to pass all
elements of practical work within the appropriate unit for both Manchester students and those of our partner colleges.
Opportunities for practical experience
The School were pleased to read that the inspection team had no concerns regarding the practical experience of students at the City of
Liverpool College. Similarly, the practical experience gained by Manchester students was identified as a valuable experience. In relation to

our second partner college – Birmingham Metropolitan College – we can confirm that appropriate work-placed learning is being sought for
students.
In conclusion, the School would like to thank the inspectorate team for their observations and their accreditation of our 2015 cohort of
graduates. The Programme Team look forward to subsequent inspections where the robustness of our interventions will be seen to further
strengthen the quality of graduates emerging from this programme.

Recommendation to the GDC
The inspectors recommend that this qualification is sufficient for holders to apply for registration as a dental technician with the General Dental
Council for this cohort only.

