RE-INSPECTION REPORT
Education Provider /
Awarding Body :

University of Central Lancashire (UCLan)

Programme / Award /
Qualification:

Diploma in Clinical Dental Technology (CDT)

Remit and Purpose:

Re-inspection referencing the Standards for
Education to determine approval of the award for
the purpose of registration with the General
Dental Council (GDC) as a Clinical Dental
Technician

Learning Outcomes:

Developing the Dental Team

Inspection Dates:

3 – 4 September 2014
9 October 2014

Inspection Panel:

Audrey Cowie (Lay Member and Chair)
James Newton (Dentist)
Caroline Logan (Dental Technician)

GDC Staff:

Laura Harrison (Lead)
James Marshall

Outcome:

Recommended that the UCLan CDT programme
is approved for students graduating in 2014

1

Re-inspection summary
This was a focused re-inspection which concentrated on areas of highest risk in order to
safeguard the public through ensuring safe beginners. The inspectors reviewed the
requirements from the 2013 inspection report which the course team was required to
address by the time of the 2014 re-inspection. These requirements are highlighted in bold in
this report.
There was a marked improvement in areas of the qualification which the inspectors had
raised concerns about in their previous report. The new course leads are to be highly
commended for the progress which has been made promptly, alongside course delivery and
within the confines of the existing model of study. The inspectors found the delivery of the
programme and the assessment of students to be educationally sound and they were
satisfied with the internal and external quality assurance processes observed. The
inspectors were confident that the passing students in October 2014 were fit to register with
the GDC as Clinical Dental Technicians.
It is recognized that the qualification will no longer be offered due to the difficulties
encountered in ensuring a standardized learning experience and assessment of students
within this model of study.

Re-inspection process and purpose of Re-inspection
1.

The re-inspection of this qualification was required as a result of the shortcomings
identified during the inspection of the 1st cohort of students, which are described in the
previous report.

2.

The aim of the re-inspection was to ensure that the students in the 2nd cohort
demonstrated, on graduation, that they met the outcomes required for registration with
the GDC as a Clinical Dental Technician.

3.

The re-inspection focuses on the Requirements within the GDC publication Standards
for Education (version 1.0 November 2012), which the inspectors identified in their initial
report as requiring attention by the School prior to the graduation of the 2nd cohort of
students. These Requirements are indicated by emboldened text. This report will
document the inspectors’ findings. It will also reflect whether the action taken by the
School has been sufficient to alter the decisions reached in the initial inspection.

4.

The inspection panel used the following descriptors to reach a decision on the extent to
which the UCLan Diploma in CDT meets each Requirement:

A Requirement is met if:
“There is sufficient appropriate evidence derived from the inspection process. This evidence
provides the inspectors with broad confidence that the provider demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students is supportive of
documentary evidence and the evidence is robust, consistent and not contradictory. There
may be minor deficiencies in the evidence supplied but these are likely to be
inconsequential.”
A Requirement is partly met if:
“Evidence derived from the inspection process is either incomplete or lacks detail and, as
such, fails to convince the inspection panel that the provider fully demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students may not fully
2

support the evidence submitted or there may be contradictory information in the evidence
provided. There is, however, some evidence of compliance and it is likely that either (a) the
appropriate evidence can be supplied in a short time frame, or, (b) any deficiencies identified
can be addressed and evidenced in the annual monitoring process.”
A Requirement is not met if:
“The provider cannot provide evidence to demonstrate a requirement or the evidence
provided is not convincing. The information gathered at the inspection through meetings with
staff and students does not support the evidence provided or the evidence is inconsistent
and/or incompatible with other findings. The deficiencies identified are such as to give rise to
serious concern and will require an immediate action plan from the provider. The
consequences of not meeting a Requirement in terms of the overall sufficiency of a
programme will depend upon the compliance of the provider across the range of
Requirements and the possible implications for public protection.”
5.

The provider of the qualification has the opportunity to provide factual corrections on the
draft report. Following the production of the final report the provider is asked to submit
observations on, or objections to, the report and the actions listed. Where the inspection
panel have recommended that the programme is sufficient for registration, the Council
of the GDC have delegated responsibility to the GDC Registrar to consider the
recommendations of the panel.

3

Standard 1 – Protecting patients
Providers must be aware of their duty to protect the public. Providers must ensure that
patient safety is paramount and care of patients is of an appropriate standard. Any risk
to the safety of patients and their care by students must be minimised
Met Partly
Not
Requirements
met
1.

Students will provide patient care only when they have
demonstrated adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical
procedures, the student should be assessed as competent in
the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients

met





2.

Patients must be made aware that they are being treated
by students and give consent

3.

Students will only provide patient care in an environment
which is safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with
relevant legislation and requirements regarding patient care



4.

When providing patient care and services, students are to be
supervised appropriately according to the activity and the
student’s stage of development.



5.

Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained.
Clinical supervisors must have appropriate general or
specialist registration with a regulatory body



6.

Students and those involved in the delivery of education and
training must be encouraged to raise concerns if they identify
any risks to patient safety

7.

Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action
must be taken by the provider

8.

Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy
and apply as required. The content and significance of the
student fitness to practise procedures must be conveyed
to students and aligned to GDC student fitness to practise
guidance. Staff involved in the delivery of the programme
should be familiar with the GDC Student Fitness to
Practise Guidance.







GDC comments
Requirement 2: Patients must be made aware that they are being treated by students
and give consent (Requirement Met, was Partly Met in 2013)
Actions identified in initial report
i. The course team must ensure students gain written, informed consent from all patients
before any treatment is provided by students. A clear policy is required and the course team
must monitor and ensure adherence to the policy

4

ii. Students’ badges must clearly identify the student by name and as a student CDT
The inspectors saw completed consent forms in the case studies they reviewed and they were
satisfied that students were gaining informed consent appropriately before commencing
treatment. A clear policy relating to the taking of patient consent was made available and
notices informing patients of the importance of providing consent were observed in the waiting
room. The inspectors also noted information which explained the different colour uniforms worn
in the dental clinic. The School should ensure the notices are always displayed in a prominent
position to ensure patients can easily see them. The course team reported that students had
been provided with badges which identify them by name and as Student Clinical Dental
Technicians, and this was evident during the inspection.
Requirement 7: Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be taken by
the provider (Requirement Met, was Partly Met in 2013)
Actions identified in initial report
i. Individuals involved in the delivery and assessment of students must recognise and act upon
any clinical safety concerns promptly and in accordance with the relevant policy
ii. There must be clear evidence that patient safety issues have been dealt with in accordance
with relevant policies and procedures
In their response to the initial inspection report, the course team indicated that they would
ensure that all staff involved in the delivery and assessment of students recognise and act
upon any clinical safety concerns promptly and in accordance with the ‘UCLan Raising
Concerns Flowchart’ using the ‘UCLan Raising Concerns Form’ or the ‘UCLan Untoward
Incident Policy and Reporting Form’. Incidents would be recorded in the ‘UCLan Incident
Report Log’.
The inspectors saw each of the above mentioned documents. Whilst there was no evidence
to suggest that they ought to have been used since January 2014, the inspectors were
confident that they would have been should the need have arisen, and crucially, that clinical
safety concerns would have been promptly and appropriately dealt with. The inspectors were
encouraged by the fact that ‘untoward incidents/concerns’ had become a standing item on
both the CDT Course Team meeting and the Dental Academic Committee meeting agendas,
the latter being the forum where compliance with correct procedures by course teams is
monitored.

Requirement 8: Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and apply as
required. The content and significance of the student fitness to practise procedures
must be conveyed to students and aligned to GDC student fitness to practise guidance.
Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar with the GDC Student
Fitness to Practise Guidance (Requirement Met, was Partly Met in 2013 )
Actions identified in initial report
i. The School must ensure there is a School-specific Fitness to Practise policy and procedures
ii. The course team must ensure that students are aware of and fully comply with the School
and University Fitness to Practise guidelines
iii. The course team must also ensure that mentors and UCLan staff understand that they need
5

to monitor students’ professional behaviours and report any failure to comply with required
standards
The inspectors were pleased to note that there is a school-specific Fitness to Practise policy
and set of procedures which are relevant to dental courses. It was pointed out that students
had been instructed on the need to be aware of and fully comply with the School and University
Fitness to Practise guidelines. The inspectors were informed that both of these documents
were available on ‘Blackboard’ and in the student handbook. The inspectors found the
University guidelines on ‘Blackboard’ and encourage the team to make the School policy and
procedures readily accessible there too.
The course team indicated that they had asked each of the mentors to provide a professional
reference for their student, prior to graduation. The mentors were required specifically to
confirm if they had any concerns about the student’s professional behaviour. The inspectors
were made aware of a situation where a mentor declined to provide a positive reference until
the outcome of a fitness to practise case has been concluded. There was documentation
available to demonstrate how the fitness to practise concern in question was dealt with and the
inspectors were satisfied that due process had been correctly followed by the course team.
They were also reassured by the actions taken by the mentor in respect of the reference.
Actions
Req.
Actions
Number

Due date
(if applicable)

Standard 2 – Quality evaluation and review of the programme
The provider must have in place effective policy and procedures for the monitoring and
review of the programme
Requirements
Met
Partly Not
met
met
9. The provider will have a framework in place that details
how it manages the quality of the programme which

includes making appropriate changes to ensure the
curriculum continues to map across to the latest GDC
outcomes and adapts to changing legislation and
external guidance. There must be a clear statement about
where responsibility lies for this function


10. The provider will have systems in place to quality assure

placements
11. Any problems identified through the operation of the

quality management framework must be addressed as
soon as possible
12. Should quality evaluation of the programme identify any

serious threats to the students achieving learning
outcomes through the programme, the GDC must be
notified at the earliest possible opportunity







13. Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and

external quality assurance procedures
14. External examiners must be utilised and must be familiar

with the learning outcomes and their context. Providers


6

should follow QAA guidelines on external examining
where applicable
15. Providers must consider and, where appropriate, act



upon concerns raised or formal reports on the quality of
education and assessment
GDC comments
Requirement 9: The provider will have a framework in place that details how it manages
the quality of the programme which includes making appropriate changes to ensure the
curriculum continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and adapts to
changing legislation and external guidance. There must be a clear statement about
where responsibility lies for this function (Requirement Partly Met, was Not Met in 2013)
Actions identified in initial report
i. The course team must develop a new and more robust qualification if it wishes to continue
training CDT students after 2013
ii. The course team and School must ensure that that an effective and robust quality
management framework is used
iii. The course team and School must arrange for stronger quality management and leadership.
There must be an effective and transparent management and reporting system in place
iv. The course team must use student, mentor and staff feedback, external examiner reports
and course reviews to inform discussions relating to the quality management of the programme
v. The course team must ensure all meetings are fully minuted
vi. The course team and School must ensure that any issues identified as part of the quality
management framework are fully discussed and any actions agreed are addressed to the point
of resolution
vii. The course team and School must ensure there is a clear audit trail of any actions taken as a
result of issues identified
viii. The School must ensure the University is kept fully informed of any issues arising and
actions taken
The inspectors were very impressed by the way in which the current course team has
significantly strengthened the governance, leadership and management of the qualification
within a short space of time and in tandem with students completing their final year.
Integral to this has been the adoption of a well tried and robust quality management
framework, which has been used for other undergraduate programmes within the School. The
inspectors had sight of the quality management framework structure and the composition of
and terms of reference for the committees and groups which feature in it. A clear action plan
concerning the quality assurance activities requiring attention was also provided and the
inspectors were confident that the new management framework would ensure these were
monitored through to completion.
The quality management framework should ensure that the University is kept fully informed of
any issues arising and actions taken. The inspectors did not see documentary evidence
relating to how and when issues were escalated and managed at University level. There was
also no evidence provided that a review of or any discussions about the programme had been
7

held at University level. This would be expected in any new course offered.
The course team informed the inspectors that student, mentor and staff feedback, external
examiner input and course reviews were used to inform discussions relating to the quality
management of the programme in accordance with University policy. The inspectors had sight
of course meeting and student liaison committee meetings, in addition to external examiner
comments on the OSCE, completed student feedback forms, completed patient questionnaires
and the results of a mentor survey. This information assured the inspectors that the course
team was using relevant feedback from a variety of sources to monitor and enhance the
existing programme and to develop a new and improved course, which it is anticipated will
commence in 2015.
The inspectors reviewed the minutes of a variety of meetings, including course team meetings
and a staff student liaison committee meeting and they were satisfied that they had been
appropriately and fully recorded. The inspectors were pleased to note the use of a clear Action
Plan, which lists actions in need of attention and a ‘traffic light’ colour coding system identifies
the progress made against each action. The inspectors were satisfied that the course team
were regularly reviewing this plan and taking effort to ensure all listed items were addressed
within timeframes.
Requirement 10: The provider will have systems in place to quality assure placements
(Requirement Not Met, was Not Met in 2013)
Actions identified in initial report
i. UCLan must carry out robust quality assurance of placements both prior to the placement of
students and during the course of the programme. This activity needs to be underpinned by a
comprehensive policy and procedure
ii. The course team must be adequately resourced to carry out the quality assurance of
placements and it must be clear who will oversee this process
iii. The course team must formalise the working partnership with the practices and ensure
that all information requested from them is received and monitored
iv. The course team must ensure that they quality assure the activities within the placement so
that there is standardised supervision and assessment of students
Whilst the new course team remains small, there appears to be a more clearly defined
leadership and structure to the team with clarity as to who has responsibility for different
aspects of the programme and in particular, the monitoring of activity within placements.
There was some evidence to suggest that the team had formalised their working relationship
with the mentors and their practices and that there was greater checking to ensure requested
feedback from mentors was received. It was noted that all summative assessment was
taking place at UCLan to ensure a standardised experience for all students. The wide spread location of the practices across the UK, in which students were based, made it
difficult to ensure rigorous and regular monitoring of practice-based activity. It was
recognised that the course team had sought to review student supervision since January
2014, however, by their own admission they could not ensure students received a
standardised learning experience.
It was clear that there was a desire within the team to alter the structure of the programme so
that there is far less reliance on the mentors in the practice placements. The intention is to
bring all course related clinical activity in-house for future cohorts. The course team indicated
in response to the previous report that the placement audit document used successfully
8

within the undergraduate BDS course will be used for any new placements. It is the intention
for the new course is that assessed clinical activity will take place in a UCLan based clinical
environment.

Requirement 11: Any problems identified through the operation of the quality
management framework must be addressed as soon as possible (Requirement Met ,
was Not Met in 2013 )
Action identified in initial report
i. The course team and School must adopt a robust comprehensive risk management and
action planning framework which enables them to identify and discuss issues arising in the
programme, record discussions and agreed actions, follow up on actions agreed and review
actions taken until the point of resolution. The framework must allow for the transparent and
efficient management of issues arising
The inspectors saw evidence of strong quality management and leadership during this reinspection and they were confident that this Requirement was now being met. The terms of
reference for the Course Management Team indicated that there were monitoring,
evaluation, development and risk identification roles. The CDT Risk Management Register
(June 2013) was seen, in addition to an Action Plan, which clearly showed that issues
relating to the programme were being recorded and managed. Also provided was the wider
School Risk Register.
Requirement 12: Should quality evaluation of the programme identify any serious
threats to the students achieving learning outcomes through the programme, the GDC
must be notified at the earliest possible opportunity (Requirement Met, was Not Met in
2013)
Action identified in initial report
i. The course team and School must develop a robust mechanism for identifying threats to
students not achieving the Learning Outcomes through rigorous quality evaluation. It is
essential that UCLan ensures the GDC is notified promptly if this risk is actual or potential
The inspectors were satisfied that the School Quality Management Framework was being
used by the team. The inspectors reviewed information on the reporting lines within the
course team and School in addition to relevant committee meeting minutes, where issues
relating to programme quality were discussed. It was clear that the team had taken prompt
measures to ensure students were assessed in- house for the duration of their 2nd year in
2014. A further example of the appropriate management of a potential risk was the careful
planning for the remediation of a student who had had to withdraw from part of the year due
to medical reasons.
Requirement 13: Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external quality
assurance procedures (Requirement Partly Met, was Not Met in 2013 )
Actions identified in initial report
i. The course team must internally review, identify and address issues on a regular and formal
basis

9

ii. All actions and decisions taken internally must be clearly and comprehensively documented
iii. The existing external examiner must comply with the School requirements regarding
attendance and input to the course
iv. The existing external examiner must take a more active role in reviewing assessments.
v. The course team must keep a formal recording of actions suggested by the external examiner
and actions taken in response
The inspectors were assured that course team meetings took place regularly under the new
leadership, with standing items including student progression, staff feedback on placements,
and the quality assurance and development of assessment methods. Minutes of these
meetings were made available. There was evidence that action plans arising from these
meetings were created and monitored in line with the traffic light system. It was noted that
the course was subject to scrutiny at School level through the Quality Management
Framework. The University internal teaching review did not occur, but it is anticipated that
this will take place for the revised qualification. As indicated in Requirement 9, there was an
absence of information about the actions taken at University level, which was disappointing.
A newly recruited external examiner reassured the inspectors that the qualification was
subject to appropriate and reliable external scrutiny. It was clear that there had been regular
and helpful communication between the course team and the external examiner to provide
adequate induction in to the role and involvement in the external process. The external
examiner reviewed and commented on question papers in advance, attended and observed
the OSCE examinations and reviewed marks awarded. Their feedback on the assessments
was available and correspondence illustrated how the course team had utilised this.
It was noted that the previous external examiner had resigned. Whilst it would have been
preferable to have had two external examiners, the panel recognised the time constraints
made it difficult to recruit a second individual in time for them to be involved in the remainder
of this programme. It was positive, however, that a second external examiner has been
appointed for the purposes of the new qualification.

Requirement 14: External examiners must be utilised and must be familiar with the
learning outcomes and their context. Providers should follow Quality Assurance
Agency (QAA) guidelines on external examining where applicable (Requirement Met,
was Not Met in 2013)
Actions identified in initial report
i. The course team must appoint a second external examiner as a priority
ii. The external examiners must be fully utilised and meet their responsibilities
iii. The external examiners must follow QAA guidelines on examining
As mentioned above, a new external examiner was involved in the course and will be joined by
a second external examiner in overseeing the new qualification. It was evident that under new
leadership, the course team was utilising the new external examiner appropriately and all the
indications were that the new programme would benefit from their input. On the basis of the
observations by the inspectors, there was no reason to doubt that QAA guidelines on
examining were being followed.

10

Requirement 15: Providers must consider and, where appropriate, act upon concerns
raised or formal reports on the quality of education and assessment (Requirement Met,
was Partly Met in 2013)
Action identified in initial report
i. The course team must act upon issues raised or concerns raised by external examiners
As mentioned in Requirement 13, there was evidence that feedback by the external
examiner on the OSCE had been used constructively by the course team. The inspectors
were confident that the team would continue to act on suggestions made by the external
examiner appropriately and in line with the relevant University policy.

Req.
Number

Actions

Due date
(if applicable)

Standard 3– Student assessment
Assessment must be reliable and valid. The choice of assessment method must be
appropriate to demonstrate achievement of the GDC learning outcomes. Assessors
must be fit to perform the assessment task
Requirements
Met Partly Not
met
met
16. To award the qualification, providers must be assured
that students have demonstrated attainment across the

full range of learning outcomes, at a level sufficient
to indicate they are safe to begin practice. This
assurance should be underpinned by a coherent
approach to aggregation and triangulation, as well as the
principles of assessment referred to in these standards.
17. The provider will have in place management systems to

plan, monitor and record the assessment of students
throughout the programme against each of the learning
outcomes
18. Assessment must involve a range of methods

appropriate to the learning outcomes and these should
be in line with current practice and routinely monitored,
quality assured and developed
19. Students will have exposure to an appropriate breadth of

patients/procedures and will undertake each activity
relating to patient care on sufficient occasions to enable
them to develop the skills and the level of competency to
achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes







11

20. The provider should seek to improve student



performance by encouraging reflection and by providing
feedback1.
21. Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills,



experience and training to undertake the task of assessment,
appropriate general or specialist registration with a regulatory
body
22. Providers must ask external examiners to report on the

extent to which assessment processes are rigorous, set
at the correct standard, ensure equity of treatment for
students and have been fairly conducted
23. Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear





criteria. Standard setting must be employed for
summative assessments
24. Where appropriate, patient/peer/customer feedback

should contribute to the assessment process
25. Where possible, multiple samples of performance

must be taken to ensure the validity and reliability of
the assessment conclusion
26. The standard expected of students in each area to be

assessed must be clear and students and staff
involved in assessment must be aware of this
standard







GDC comments
Requirement 16: To award the qualification, providers must be assured that students
have demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes, at a level
sufficient to indicate they are safe to begin practice. This assurance should be
underpinned by a coherent approach to aggregation and triangulation, as well as the
principles of assessment referred to in these standards. (Requirement Met, was Partly
Met in 2013)
Actions identified in initial report
i. The approach to and management of student assessment must be transparent and robust
iii. The discretionary decision-making powers of the Assessment Board must be clarified and
clearly stated
ii. The ‘sign up’ process needs to be made significantly more robust and clear pre-requisites
should be developed which students have to achieve before being allowed to proceed to the
end of year modular examinations and from year 1 to year 2. Year 1 modules must be

1

Reflective practice should not be part of the assessment process in a way that risks effective student use

12

achieved by students before they can progress in to year 2
iv. The process for aggregating marks must be streamlined and simplified
The assessment of students since January 2014 has been more robust and reliable than
previously and the new course team is to be commended for this. The inspectors considered
that the OSCEs were very well organised and run in a professional manner. There were
effective briefing and de-briefing meetings before and after the examination with assessors,
which enabled discussion and clarification of outstanding issues. The inspectors reviewed a
Clinical Placement Assessment Protocol and the assessment criteria for case studies. They
also saw relevant marking descriptors and scoring sheets for the OSCEs and a number of
DOPS and they concluded that these were all sound. Reviews of marked work suggested
there was a consistent and fair approach to marking. The inspectors acknowledged that
there was very little the course team could change in the current programme in terms of how
marks were aggregated. It was clear that the course team intends for there to be clear and
robust procedures relating to progression from preclinical to clinical stages and for modular
progression in the new course, which the inspectors are supportive of.
There was evidence that one member of staff was not fully aware of the assessment
requirements regarding partial dentures. Incorrect information was provided to six students
concerning the number of partial dentures which needed to be undertaken satisfactorily, and
this resulted in them being given additional time to submit their work. The team is encouraged
to ensure all staff and students are fully aware of what is expected of them.
The inspectors identified a slight mismatch between module descriptors contained on
‘Blackboard’ and within the student handbook. The assessments for modules DX2012 and
DX2013 had been modified and the new versions of these descriptors were only available on
‘Blackboard’. It was considered that this small oversight was likely due to the immense amount
of developmental work being undertaken by the course team and the inspectors encourage ongoing scrutiny of course information.
The team indicated that the Assessment Board can only make recommendations on
progression and that these must be based on the University Academic Regulations and must
be clearly minuted.
Requirement 17: The provider will have in place management systems to plan, monitor
and record the assessment of students throughout the programme against each of the
learning outcomes (Requirement Met , was Not Met in 2013)
Actions identified in initial report
i. The course team needs to introduce a system which facilitates the regular and thorough
monitoring and review of student progress. There must be close and regular monitoring of
student’s on-going clinical activity
ii. The course team must develop a centralised monitoring system for recording individual
student’s progress against learning outcomes
iii. The course team must keep accurate and thorough records of student activity and
assessment results
The course team has introduced a system whereby they review students’ clinical activity log
sheets on a monthly basis and the inspectors were satisfied that this appeared to be working
well. The inspectors were encouraged by the improved monitoring of student activity and the
regular communication between the course team and students regarding particular areas of
13

patient or procedure types where further exposure was needed. Records of student activity
and assessment results were being maintained and the inspectors were confident that the
centralised monitoring system, which is intended for the new course, will further strengthen
this important aspect of student performance management.
Requirement 18: Assessment must involve a range of methods appropriate to the
learning outcomes and these should be in line with current practice and routinely
monitored, quality assured and developed (Requirement Met, was Partly Met in 2013 )
Actions identified in initial report
i. The course team must make it clear to students and all involved in the programme when
assessments will take place, what the assessments are designed to assess and whether they
are formative or summative. All module-related documentation must be accurate
ii. The course team must quality assure and review assessments on a regular basis
iii. The course team must develop assessments which are clear, targeted and fair
The inspectors noted that the course leads had provided to students and staff a clear
programme of activity from January to September 2014. This was most helpful given the
changes that the course team were required to make, in order to address the required
actions from the initial inspection report. Aside from a slight discrepancy in information
provided in module descriptors and on ‘Blackboard’, which is described in Requirement 16,
there was clear information about the nature and purpose of the various assessments. It was
very encouraging to see that assessments had been standard set and quality assured both
internally and externally and in line with University regulations. The inspectors were
impressed by the improvements made to the assessments they observed and reviewed and
commend the course team for their efforts. It was recognised that in future there is a need to
ensure all written papers and case presentations are anonymised to avoid any potential
marking bias.

Requirement 19: Students will have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and will undertake each activity relating to patient care on
sufficient occasions to enable them to develop the skills and the level of competency
to achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes (Requirement Met, was Not Met in
2013)
Actions identified in initial report
i. The course team must ensure that mentors and students are fully aware of the breadth and
range of patients and procedure types that students need to have access to during the
programme
ii. The course team must put in place a mechanism whereby staff can quickly identify if a
student has insufficient access to patient/ procedure-types and they must then quickly
remedy the problem
As mentioned in Requirement 17, monthly reviews of student activity have occurred since
January 2014 in order for the course team to be able to identify any shortfalls in students’
clinical experience. Whilst inspectors did not see documentation which clearly identified
outstanding procedures, they did see monthly log-sheets stating which procedures had been
completed. Discussions with the course leads satisfied the inspectors that they would
14

document and promptly address situations where students were lacking in experience of
particular patient or procedure types. It was felt that the system of emailing students on a
regular basis to let them know what they needed to achieve in terms of clinical activity was
supportive and encouraging. There are now guidelines in place regarding minimum clinical
requirements and this has undoubtedly assisted students and staff.

Requirement 20: The provider should seek to improve student performance by
encouraging reflection and by providing feedback2 (Requirement Met, was Not Met in
2013)
Actions identified in initial report
i. Good quality feedback must be provided in a timely fashion after formative and summative
assessments, so as to maximise the potential for the student to learn, develop and achieve
ii. The School must follow the University guidelines on the provision of feedback
iii. Constructive feedback must be given on case studies to prevent inappropriate cases being
presented as part of the summative assessment process
iv. Students should be encouraged to reflect on their practice, so as to maximise their learning
potential
The inspectors saw evidence of helpful feedback provided by course tutors and assessors to
students. It was not possible to establish whether feedback was routinely provided within the
15 day timeframe, as stipulated by the University, but it was generally effective, as judged by
successive assignments. In respect of students’ case studies, there was evidence of
constructive feedback provided at the case selection stage. This had resulted in an
improvement in the submitted case studies although the inspectors did note one example of
an inappropriate case choice. Some feedback provided via the computerised system of
Turnitin was generic in nature and the course team recognised the need to personalise the
comments as appropriate, to ensure students realise that their work has been looked at
individually.
The students are actively encouraged to reflect on their practice by the course team. The
inspectors considered that the guidance on reflection provided was very beneficial, and the
reflection witnessed in the case studies was of a good quality.
Requirement 22: Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent to
which assessment processes are rigorous, set at the correct standard, ensure equity of
treatment for students and have been fairly conducted (Requirement Met, was Not Met
in 2013)
Actions identified in initial report
i. The course team and School should take note of and respond to comments made in an
External Examiners’ report
ii. Any actions taken by the course team in response to external examiner reports must be
documented
iii. There must be formal communications between the course team and the external
2

Reflective practice should not be part of the assessment process in a way that risks effective student use

15

examiner(s), which allows for a clear audit trail
iv. The course team must ensure the external examiner carries out their responsibilities
appropriately and in full
There was evidence that the course team had acted upon the feedback from the new external
examiner in advance of the OSCE examination. The inspectors were confident that the course
team would consider and respond appropriately to comments made in any future external
examiner report. There was also a clear and logical trail of communications between the
course team and the external examiner. Whilst the new external examiner was unable to
attend a formal induction in to the role, the inspectors had no doubt that the course team had
provided the external examiner with a full and clear explanation of the role.

Requirement 23: Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear criteria.
Standard setting must be employed for summative assessments (Requirement Met, was
Not Met in 2013)
Actions identified in initial report
i. All assessments should be standard set and clear records that this has happened should be
kept
ii. The course team must provide clear descriptors and a clear marking scheme to students
and mentors
iii. The course team must ensure the marking process is transparent to staff and students
iv. The course team must apply the marking framework for a given assessment consistently
across all candidates
v. The course team must ensure compatible and clear descriptors are given to grades within a
marking scheme
vi. The course team must structure DOPs so that standardised questions are available to all
assessors. This will ensure transparency and fairness across the examination
The inspectors saw evidence of standard setting statistics and records of the standard setting
processes followed. This revealed a robust and educationally sound approach to the
assessment of students, which the new course team is to be commended for. There were,
however, a high number of overall passes with merit and distinction and the external examiner
commented that the course team may wish to consider this when setting the passing ‘standard’
in future.
There was evidence that clear descriptors, marking systems and question guides for the
various assessments had been used, to ensure consistency and fairness in assessment and
marking. The inspectors were generally very impressed by the performance of assessors in the
OSCE, although they were surprised to see a senior assessor inappropriately prompting
candidates.
Requirement 24: Where appropriate, patient/peer/customer feedback should contribute
to the assessment process (Requirement Partly met, was Not Met in 2013)
Action identified in initial report

16

i. The course team should ensure patient and peer feedback on student’s activity is regularly
obtained and, if possible, that it contributes to both formative and summative assessment as
well as programme review
The course team indicated that all patient and peer feedback gained during clinical activity
within UCLan clinical facilities was reviewed and results were given as formative feedback to
the students. Copies of patient feedback questionnaires were seen, but there was no
evidence of the formative feedback provided individually to students. In the OSCEs, actors
contributed to the assessment of students, although it did not contribute to the final mark. It is
anticipated that feedback will be used in summative assessments in the new course.
Requirement 25: Where possible, multiple samples of performance must be taken to
ensure the validity and reliability of the assessment conclusion (Requirement Met, was
Partly Met in 2013)
The inspectors found this requirement to be Met on the basis of the re-inspection.

Requirement 26: The standard expected of students in each area to be assessed must
be clear and students and staff involved in assessment must be aware of this standard
(Requirement Met, was Not Met in 2013)
Action identified in initial report
i. The course team must ensure students and all involved in the delivery of assessments are
clear on the required standard
From the evidence provided, the inspectors felt that both staff involved in assessments and
students should now be clear as to the required standard in assessments. This was
perceived to be a result of the hard work of the course team in producing clearer and more
informative assessment documentation than had previously been the case As noted in
Requirement 16, there is a need for careful reviewing of documentation to ensure any
changes made are replicated across all sources of information.

Actions for the Provider
Req.
Actions
Number

Due date
(if applicable)

17

Summary of Actions
No

Action

Observations

Due date

Response from Provider

Observations from the provider on content of report
The course team would like to thanks the GDC for their patience during this long inspection cycle. We have as team agreed with and put into action any requirements
of the various reports and now feel in a much stronger positon to progress with the proposed course format

Recommendations to the GDC
The inspectors recommend that this qualification is approved for students graduating in 2014.

Instructions to the School
To provide the GDC with assessment paperwork, mark-sheets and final grade documentation relating to the remaining student, upon
completion of his studies

18

