Education Quality Assurance Inspection Report
Education
Provider/Awarding
Body
University of Bristol

Outcome of Inspection

Programme/Award

Inspection Dates

Bachelor of Dental
Surgery (BDS)

30 and 31 January 2019

Recommended that the BDS
continues to be sufficient for the
graduating cohort to register as
dentists

1

Full details of the inspection process can be found in the annex
Inspection summary
Remit and purpose of inspection:

Inspection referencing the Standards for
Education to determine approval of the
award for the purpose of registration with
the GDC as a dentist.
Specific Requirements for review following
risk assessment: 4, 8, 9, 11, 13, 15 and 19.

Inspection dates (programme):

30 and 31 January 2019 (1.5-day inspection)

Learning Outcomes:

Preparing for Practice (dentistry)

Inspection panel:

Eileen Skinner (Chair and Non-registrant
Member)
Thomas Addison (Dentist Member)
Stuart Boomer (Dentist Member)
Carolyn Inman (Dentist Member)
Kathryn Counsell-Hubbard (Quality
Assurance Manager)
Martin McElvanna (Education and Quality
Assurance Officer)

The BDS programme at the University of Bristol is an established and respected programme
that utilises the full range of facilities at its disposal. Students attend a range of clinics in
order to gain the requisite skills to progress towards being safe beginners.
The school is responsive to the needs of its students, from whom the feedback on the
programme was excellent. Evidence of changes to the programme, as a result of student
feedback, was readily available. This has culminated in the new BDS programme that will be
introduced for current year 4 students progressing to year 5, as well as new year 1 students,
in September 2019.
The programme, along with many other programmes of this kind, struggles to recruit and
retain an effective mix of patients in order to address the students’ needs. Coupled with this
is the compartmentalisation of the programme resulting in the staffing requirements for each
clinic (to supervise students) being devolved to the Element Leads. This has led to situations
when the supervision of students has been disjointed and therefore monitoring can be
fractured. Two students were able to undertake clinical work for a term without logging their
activities on the clinical recording system, CAFS, which gave the panel great cause for
concern. Cohesive monitoring of the student experience together with a higher level,
scrutiny-based approach to arranging supervisors are two of the areas in which the
programme can improve in order to transition from adequate to exemplary.

2

This inspection was a focused inspection based on specific Requirements from the
Standards for Education identified as part the risk assessment of the programme’s annual
monitoring 1 return from 2018. All other requirements are considered to be met.
The panel wishes to thank the staff, students, and external stakeholders involved with the
BDS programme at the University of Bristol for their co-operation and assistance with the
inspection.

Annual monitoring is the regular review process used to monitor programmes and determine inspection
activity.

1

3

Background and overview of Qualification
Annual intake

Programme duration
Format of programme

Number of providers delivering the
programme

71 HEFCE-capped home and overseas
students. Up to 8 non-HEFCE overseas
students
187 weeks over 5 years
Current curriculum consists of 23 units
within the themes of Biomedical sciences,
Dental skills, Primary care dentistry,
Advanced care dentistry, Human disease,
Personal and Professional Development.
Students must pass all units within a year to
progress to the next year.
Year 1: 4 units delivering underpinning
scientific knowledge, professionalism and
communication skills
Year 2: 7 units delivering underpinning
scientific knowledge, simulated clinical
experience, professionalism and
communication skills. Direct patient
treatment from Term 3.
Year 3: 5 units delivering simulated clinical
experience, direct patient treatment, human
disease including hospital placement,
professionalism and communication skills.
Years 4-5: 7 further units delivering
advanced simulated clinical experience,
direct patient treatment, consultant clinic
attendance, outreach placements.
BDS Finals incorporates Gateway to Finals
assessments and is delivered in three
parts.
A new curriculum from 2019-20 has a
revised structure and a new Finals format.
Two:
Educational Provider: University of Bristol
Placement Provider: University Hospitals
Bristol NHS Foundation Trust.

4

Outcome of relevant Requirements2
Standard One
1

Met

2

Met

3

Met

4

Met

5

Met

6

Met

7

Met

8

Met
Standard Two

9

Met

10

Met

11

Partly Met

12

Met
Standard Three

13

Partly Met

14

Met

15

Partly Met

16

Met

17

Met

18

Met

19

Partly Met

20

Met

21

Met

All Requirements within the Standards for Education are applicable for all programmes. Specific
Requirements will be examined during inspection activity through risk analysis processes or due to current
thematic reviews.

2

5

Standard 1 – Protecting patients
Providers must be aware of their duty to protect the public. Providers must ensure that
patient safety is paramount and care of patients is of an appropriate standard. Any risk
to the safety of patients and their care by students must be minimised.
Requirement 1: Students must provide patient care only when they have demonstrated
adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical procedures, the student should be
assessed as competent in the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 2: Providers must have systems in place to inform patients that they may
be treated by students and the possible implications of this. Patient agreement to
treatment by a student must be obtained and recorded prior to treatment commencing.
(Requirement Met)
Requirement 3: Students must only provide patient care in an environment which is
safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with relevant legislation and
requirements regarding patient care, including equality and diversity, wherever
treatment takes place. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 4: When providing patient care and services, providers must ensure that
students are supervised appropriately according to the activity and the student’s stage
of development. (Requirement Met)
The programme is divided on a modular basis in which broad areas of study are termed as
‘elements’, with each element having its own lead. The Element Lead is responsible for
ensuring the supervision of students on clinics and outreach placements appropriate to that
element. Details of the supervision ratios, which differ depending on the particular area of
dentistry being practised, were provided to the panel and found to be sufficient.
Students reported to the panel that they were satisfied with the level of supervision given. In
most clinics and outreach placements, students work in pairs and/or are paired with a dental
nurse so that even when the supervisor is not present, they are not unsupervised.
The benefits of the Element Leads having ownership of the supervision arrangements were
evidenced in discussions with outreach supervisors, who reported close working relationships
with the Element Leads. However, this division in the administration of supervision means that
essential critical overarching oversight is absent. In some areas, such as paediatrics, there are
a small number of supervisors so consistency is easier to achieve. However, in some
elements of adult dentistry, the numbers of supervisors required, coupled with a timetable that
involves constant rotation across clinical sites, means that the student experience is less
consistent.
The rotational pattern of student clinic placements resulted in a large number of different
tutors, with a corresponding lack of consistency. This also led to a significant clinical recording
issue (detailed further under Requirement 8). The programme leads are aware of the
implications of this issue as was evidenced during extensive questioning by the panel.
However, on the basis of the rest of the supervision data, student feedback to the panel, and
the level of insight exhibited by the programme leads and staff, the panel find this Requirement
to be met. The panel would strongly recommend, however, that the programme leads continue
to consider and investigate issues which could arise from the lack of consistency between
supervisors on clinic and are proactive in evaluating their processes.
6

Requirement 5: Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained. This should
include training in equality and diversity legislation relevant for the role. Clinical
supervisors must have appropriate general or specialist registration with a UK
regulatory body. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 6: Providers must ensure that students and all those involved in the
delivery of education and training are aware of their obligation to raise concerns if they
identify any risks to patient safety and the need for candour when things go wrong.
Providers should publish policies so that it is clear to all parties how concerns should
be raised and how these concerns will be acted upon. Providers must support those
who do raise concerns and provide assurance that staff and students will not be
penalised for doing so. (Requirement Met/Partly Met)
Requirement 7: Systems must be in place to identify and record issues that may affect
patient safety. Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be taken by
the provider and where necessary the relevant regulatory body should be notified.
(Requirement Met)
Requirement 8: Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and apply as
required. The content and significance of the student fitness to practise procedures
must be conveyed to students and aligned to GDC Student Fitness to Practise
Guidance. Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar with the
GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance. Providers must also ensure that the GDC’s
Standards for the Dental Team are embedded within student training. (Requirement Met)
A new process for dealing with student fitness to practice issues has been introduced. Multiple
pieces of evidence about the process were provided to the panel who deemed the process to
be robust. When triangulated, students reported that they have enjoyed the pastoral element
introduced into the new process. The students also clearly understood the remit and purpose
of the student referral system, which is part of the new process. This allows anyone who
comes into contact with students, including peers and patients, to raise a concern. The process
is used by staff within the programme to better formalise the escalation of concerns regarding
student performance.
There were some elements of the new process that the panel found warranted further
attention. Case Investigators (CIs) have responsibility for meeting with students when an issue
arises and deciding what action should follow, such as escalation to the formal University
mechanisms or issuing a formal warning. However, having only one CI making such a
decision, particularly as part of a new process, caused the panel concern regarding the
consistency of approach. The panel felt that a decision agreed by at least two of the three
available CIs may be more robust and less open to challenge. The panel was also concerned
that there is no published standard stating how many formal warnings may be issued before a
student is referred to formal fitness to practice proceedings. The panel would recommend that
a threshold is considered and introduced to ensure that cases are appropriately escalated,
when appropriate.
The panel found this Requirement to be met. The panel would encourage further development
of the process so that decision making is seen to be fully reasoned and consistent, and that
everyone involved understands and follows the process. However, the panel also wished to
commend the provider for the insight shown during the inspection. The provider informed the
panel that it will better publicise the student fitness to practice process, based on information
from meetings with students, and will also increase its review of the clinical recording system,
CAFS, to identify potential fitness to practice issues earlier.

7

Standard 2 – Quality evaluation and review of the programme
The provider must have in place effective policy and procedures for the monitoring and
review of the programme.
Requirement 9: The provider must have a framework in place that details how it
manages the quality of the programme which includes making appropriate changes to
ensure the curriculum continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and adapts
to changing legislation and external guidance. There must be a clear statement about
where responsibility lies for this function. (Requirement Met)
The panel was provided with evidence of a comprehensive committee structure involving
various groups at University, Faculty, and School level. Chief amongst these is the Dental
Education Committee (DEC), a School-level group that is concerned with the overall delivery
and quality achieved by all dental programmes at the University. The DEC undertakes an
Annual Programme Review (APR) which is a paper-based exercise drawing together various
pieces of information and feedback to appraise the units that comprise the BDS programme.
This process also utilises peer review which is undertaken by the Unit Leads.
An impressive aspect of the DEC is its inclusion of student representatives. The provider uses
a University-level Education Action Plan (EAP) that defines the strategic aims and objectives
of the programme along with the actions to be completed to achieve them. The EAP is
presented at DEC meetings and students may review and feedback on the plans at that time.
The panel was unclear as to the scope of the EAP as the document appeared not to utilise
timescales. Some items were ticked off as being completed with little explanation. The panel
would, therefore, also urge the provider to introduce additional detail to this document.
Expanding on what has been done, how and when would allow for easier review and give the
provider a record that actions have been completed. The use of deadlines would also help the
EAP evolve from guidance to a living document that determines the work that must be done to
ensure the ongoing quality of the programme.
The School sits within a faculty comprising three schools of health science namely medicine,
veterinary medicine and dentistry. The programme leads for the BDS sit on the Faculty level
committees that report directly to the University Academic Quality and Standards Committee.
The programme leads informed the panel that the structure will be changing in 2019/20 as the
University imposes a higher-level quality process. It was not clear what the outcome of this
change will be and the panel would urge the provider to inform the GDC on how these
changes will impact the management structure within the School and quality assurance
process for the programme.
The panel found that this Requirement was met.
Requirement 10: Any concerns identified through the Quality Management framework,
including internal and external reports relating to quality, must be addressed as soon
as possible and the GDC notified of serious threats to students achieving the learning
outcomes. The provider will have systems in place to quality assure placements.
(Requirement Met)
Requirement 11: Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external quality
assurance procedures. External quality assurance should include the use of external
examiners, who should be familiar with the GDC learning outcomes and their context
and QAA guidelines should be followed where applicable. Patient and/or customer
feedback must be collected and used to inform programme development. (Requirement
Partly Met)
8

Comprehensive evidence was provided to demonstrate that the provider is meeting the first
part of this Requirement. The direct line of communication between the provider and the
University, as well as the constant oversight provided by such clear reporting lines, gave the
panel reassurance not only of a comprehensive quality assurance structure but also of
external oversight.
Further externality is provided via the use of external examiners who comment on the content
of the units as well as on final assessments. The panel saw evidence which showed that, in
most cases, external examiners’ suggestions were acted upon. The appointment and use of
external examiners is governed by University policy. Patient feedback is also collected from
the adult dental health clinics, and while this primarily feeds into progression meetings, such
feedback can be escalated and considered by the programme leads.
The panel identified that effective collection and use of patient feedback is an issue. Currently,
feedback is not routinely gathered from all clinics which prevents a proportion of the patient
base from being able to comment on their treatment. The use of comment cards was found to
be useful and an excellent method of gathering contemporaneous feedback. However, there
was not a standardised process in place to obtain feedback from all clinics.
Implementation of an effective method of gathering patient feedback from across all clinics,
underpinned by a formal process for reviewing that feedback, would allow this Requirement to
be met. Until that time, the panel find the Requirement to be partly met.
Requirement 12: The provider must have effective systems in place to quality assure
placements where students deliver treatment to ensure that patient care and student
assessment across all locations meets these Standards. The quality assurance systems
should include the regular collection of student and patient feedback relating to
placements. (Requirement Met)

9

Standard 3– Student assessment
Assessment must be reliable and valid. The choice of assessment method must be
appropriate to demonstrate achievement of the GDC learning outcomes. Assessors
must be fit to perform the assessment task.
Requirement 13: To award the qualification, providers must be assured that students
have demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes, and that they
are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner. Evidence must be provided that
demonstrates this assurance, which should be supported by a coherent approach to the
principles of assessment referred to in these standards. (Requirement Partly Met)
The programme benefits from a coherent “sign-up” procedure involving external examiners.
The process is structured and inclusive with various meetings involving students and nonstudents. A student’s progression to final assessments, or not, is based on a range of
information. While there are ‘totals’ in place which guide clinical achievement, this information
is considered in conjunction with the student’s overall performance.
A full and varied range of assessments are utilised throughout the programme and are
governed by relevant university policies. However, the panel did find the programme to be very
assessment focussed. In particular, fifth year students currently undergo various assessments
within a short time frame as well as working full time in clinics. The provider is introducing an
updated curriculum for the 2019/20 programme, and while the structure of the assessment
timetable has been broadened, the burden of the number of assessments still appeared to be
significant.
Despite an appropriate “sign-up” process, the panel was concerned by the apparent conflict
between a holistic assessment of student attainment and the use of “totals”. These appeared
to vary significantly among students for a variety of reasons including availability of patients.
The panel accepted that “totals” were not strictly adhered to but the online recording system,
CAFS, is based on those “totals”. Numbers of procedures undertaken, which feed into “totals,”
were of primary concern to the students interviewed. In recent years, all students have
progressed to finals despite the disparity in the numbers of procedures undertaken and even
when students have lacked the required number of procedures which go towards their “totals”.
This information led the panel to question the provider’s rationale for having “totals” at all and
whether a different system might be more in keeping with the provider’s holistic approach to
student progression.
The panel was also concerned by the “totals” examined for the current fifth year students,
shown on CAFS. These numbers showed a disparity in the amount of experience between
students, with some students achieving double the number of procedures compared with their
peers. Updated numbers were provided to the panel following the inspection but the concern
remains that the student experience is not consistent and equitable. In addition, neither the
programme leads nor other programme staff were able to describe the process for identifying
and monitoring struggling students outside of the monthly progression meetings. How one
supervisor would communicate his/her concerns to another supervisor, and how this would be
subsequently recorded, monitored and escalated, was not clear. The panel was concerned that
students failing to meet their “totals” would not be identified in sufficient time to enable them to
gain the requisite amount of clinical experience.
To meet this Requirement, the provider must implement a formalised process for identifying
and monitoring struggling students with current progression procedures. The student
experience must be reviewed to ensure that it is as consistent and equitable as possible. The
provider should also review its use of “totals” and should continue to review and refine the new
curriculum to ensure the assessment schedule is not unduly burdensome.
10

Requirement 14: The provider must have in place management systems to plan, monitor
and centrally record the assessment of students, including the monitoring of clinical
and/or technical experience, throughout the programme against each of the learning
outcomes. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 15: Students must have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and should undertake each activity relating to patient care on
sufficient occasions to enable them to develop the skills and the level of competency to
achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes. (Requirement Partly Met)
The panel was largely satisfied as to the student experience based on the evidence provided.
Of particular note were the effective use of Structured Clinical Observed Tasks (SCOTs) to
judge progression in earlier years of the programme and the use of pre-general anaesthetic
assessment clinics for paediatric experience. The panel was also pleased with the evidence
provided regarding human disease experience which is integrated with basic science and
pathology.
Of concern was the management and allocation of patients to students. Students may refer
between year groups but this is not a formal process. The formal allocation of patients is done
by a non-clinician and it is the students’ responsibility to obtain the patients they need. The
provider aims to treat patients holistically. This means that patients won’t be transferred to
students for different parts of their treatment based on the clinical experience which the
students need. The panel fully support the concept of holistic patient care being delivered by
the students. However, given the disparity in student experience, and the lack of clinician
involvement in the process of patient allocation to students, there was no clear process for
ensuring that students were being provided with appropriate patients to meet their needs.
Alongside this, the absence of a clear pathway for students to pass on the care of patients to
their fellow students appeared to result in some students not being assigned patients that
would address the student’s clinical experience requirements at that time. The panel felt that
the process for allocation of patients to students was in need of revision and would benefit from
a clinician’s input.
The panel recognised the efforts of the provider to recruit more patients and noted that there is
a waiting list of patients. However, the panel would recommend a review of the waiting list to
ensure that the correct patient profile is available for students. Often, students are completing
multiple procedures before being able to practice the procedure that they need to count as part
of their “totals”. This means that there can be significant repetition of simpler, common skills
and less opportunity for students to work on complex procedures which are rarer. Refining the
selection criteria may go some way to improving the student experience. Equally, the provider
could consider teaming senior students with junior students to share the holistic treatment plan
or else incorporate dental hygiene and therapy students in order to promote team working.
To fully meet this Requirement, the provider must review and improve its categorisation of
patients and the way in which patients are allocated to students. A formal process for students
to share patients based on their own clinical competence needs must be considered and
implemented with cohesive staff support.
Requirement 16: Providers must demonstrate that assessments are fit for purpose and
deliver results which are valid and reliable. The methods of assessment used must be
appropriate to the learning outcomes, in line with current and best practice and be
routinely monitored, quality assured and developed. (Requirement Met/Partly Met/Not
Met)

11

Requirement 17: Assessment must utilise feedback collected from a variety of sources,
which should include other members of the dental team, peers, patients and/or
customers. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 18: The provider must support students to improve their performance by
providing regular feedback and by encouraging students to reflect on their practice.
(Requirement Met)
Requirement 19: Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills, experience and
training to undertake the task of assessment, including appropriate general or specialist
registration with a UK regulatory body. Examiners/ assessors should have received
training in equality and diversity relevant for their role. (Requirement Partly Met)
The panel received evidence regarding staff training and staff retention. Some processes were
found to be appropriate: there is effective logging of staff training, including equality and
diversity training. Staff involved in examining students must observe an entire diet of
examinations before examining students, at which point the provider ensures that they are
paired with an experienced examiner. The panel was originally concerned that the withdrawal
of NHS staff from University processes, such as examining students, might have had a
detrimental effect on the programme but the evidence confirmed that this was not the case.
However, the panel would support the provider’s efforts to re-engage NHS staff as part of the
NHS contract.
The provider advised that assessments are videoed but these are not routinely used in either
calibration or in the training of new supervisors or examiners. The panel recommended that
such a resource should be fully exploited.
However, the panel did have concerns in other areas. Due to the delegation of key areas of
governance to the individual Element Leads, the calibration of supervisors differs depending on
the element in question. For example, calibration exercises were evidenced for the Restorative
and Adult Dental Health areas. The panel was concerned that there is not a consistent
approach, defined by policy, as to how and when, calibration should take place. It is entirely
within the remit of the individual Element Lead as to how supervisors are trained and
calibrated.
The training and calibration of supervisors must be revised and standardised across the
programme, incorporating areas of good practice into every clinical area. The provider should
also consider using all types of technology at their disposal, such as videoed assessments, to
better enable such training and calibration to take place.
Requirement 20: Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent to which
assessment processes are rigorous, set at the correct standard, ensure equity of
treatment for students and have been fairly conducted. The responsibilities of the
external examiners must be clearly documented. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 21: Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear criteria. The
standard expected of students in each area to be assessed must be clear and students
and staff involved in assessment must be aware of this standard. An appropriate
standard setting process must be employed for summative assessments. (Requirement
Met)

12

Summary of Action
Req.
number
4

Action

Observations & response from Provider

Due date

The provider should investigate what issues
could arise from the current method of
organising supervision for students and
evaluate what can be done to prevent
issues arising.

A key driver of students’ variation in supervision is the
existing timetable. We continue to work on our clinical
student timetables for our new BDS Curriculum. From
September 2019 will move to a new and consistent
clinical rotation for students in Year 5. We will continue
to roll out new clinical timetables for the other years of
the programme in line with the introduction of each new
academic year.

Annual Monitoring
2020/21

In addition, the School has recently appointed 3.6FTE
(5 Headcount) senior clinical academic staff, joining the
School in Autumn 2019. Further appointments are
anticipated this calendar year for 2FTE 50:50 funded
posts (with UHBristol) at a senior level in Oral Surgery.
We are starting to implement a new workload planning
model into the School; this along with the new
appointments will provide more consistency of
supervision on clinic. This will be supported by the
introduction of e-rostering software which will be utilised
to timetable supervisors and manage annual leave.

9

The provider should contact the GDC as
soon as any significant issues are identified
as a result of the change to quality
management structures.

9

The provider should consider expanding the
use of the EAP.

In addition, we have already held a calibration session
for staff and are calibrating their grading behaviour via
feedback from our CAFS system.
We continue to evaluate and develop our quality
management structures. During 2019/20 we anticipate
further work at a School and Faculty level to enhance
quality assurance structures with our placement
provider. Naturally we would contact the GDC were any
issues identified.
The EAP will outline delivery of SMART objectives and
closely monitor and report timings of completed actions.

Annual Monitoring
2020/21

Annual Monitoring
2020/21
13

11

The provider must introduce a method of
gathering patient feedback across all clinics.
A policy should be put in place that outlines
how such feedback should be considered
and fed into programme review.

13

The provider must implement a formalised
process for identifying and monitoring
struggling students outside of progression
procedures.

From 2019 the EAP will be scrutinised by a new
University Quality Team (UQT), which will further
improve this process. The School’s Director of
Education will be a member of the UQT.
Following several pilots of methods to collect patient
feedback, we have developed the functionality within
our ePortfolio (CAFS). Following a successful pilot on
the largest student department in the Hospital, we will
roll out patient feedback collection across all other
areas in 2019/20.
We have raised this topic as a factual correction.
Students have an individual review of their progress
towards Totals with their Element Lead at the start and
end of Year-4 and at the start of Year-5. Students also
have regular meetings with their Clinical Group Mentor.
Furthermore, the Year-5 Lead also meets with students
individually to assess progress. All these meetings
derive an ‘action plan’ to support the student’s
attainment. Any student who appears to require support
is flagged and a further review meeting arranged to
ensure that progress has been made.

Annual Monitoring
2020/21

Annual Monitoring
2020/21

The effectiveness of our processes is evidenced by the
observation that all our students have been supported
to gain the required levels of experience and skill for the
last 4 years. Repeated meetings with the last student
not to have gained the necessary experience found that
student to be disengaged for non-academic reasons.
The student was barred from sitting finals, but with
further support was able to achieve his totals and pass
finals six months later.
In addition, we have robust formal processes for
identifying and monitoring students struggling with
pastoral issues or with fitness to practice that
14

13

13

13

The provider must audit student exposure to
a variety of patients and identify areas
where this can be improved.

The provider should undertake a review of
the use of totals in measuring student
experience and competence.

The provider should continue to review and
refine the new curriculum to ensure that the
assessment timetable is not unduly
burdensome.

supplement the informal processes that form part of our
caring academic culture.
We will audit student exposure to a variety of patients to
identify areas where this can be improved.

Annual Monitoring
2020/21

We will review our categorisation and allocation of
patients as part of the work for our new curriculum,
which emphasises greater clinical experience for
students.
We will review our use of Totals in measuring student
experience and competence.

Annual Monitoring
2020/21

In the interim, Totals are not an absolute requirement.
The portfolio of work undertaken by each student is
looked at holistically to ensure that they have covered a
wide range of procedures and there will be a certain
degree of compensation allowed depending upon
individual student experience.
The scope of Totals has increased for 2019/20 to
include also simpler procedures. This will help to ensure
that students view all patients as worthwhile within their
education, and that as they progress through the
programme they should not just be focusing on the
more complex cases.
The structure within our new curriculum is streamlined
Annual Monitoring
and increasingly aligned for our summative
2020/21
assessments. There is also greater focus on student
engagement to promote professionalism and the use of
formative assessment to support students’ learning.
A principle of our new curriculum (BDS21) will be
programme-based assessment, so that we will assess
across the entire programme rather than having
separate assessments for each unit, with the burden
that creates. Thus, programmatic assessment in Year-

15

1 BDS 21 will drastically reduce the number of Year-1
summative assessments.
The number of assessments for Year-5 will be reduced
by one third for the next academic year (18
assessments for Gateways/Finals 2018/29 down to 12
for Finals in 2019/20).

15

The provider must review and improve its
categorisation and allocation of patients to
students. A formal process for students to
share patients must be considered and
implemented with cohesive staff support.

We are also reducing assessments where we can
ahead of rolling out BDS21. For example, following
consultation with the External Examiner, the Unit of
Dental Skills Year-3 for 2019/20 will have 3 fewer
summative assessments. This will be achieved by a
mixture of combining some assessment and by making
others formative.
Patients are assessed by a clinician cognisant with
student requirements, and are added to student waiting
lists, categorised by procedure type. Students are
allocated patients based on their requirements for a
particular stage of learning. There is oversight provided
by senior clinical academics and Element Leads.

Annual Monitoring
2020/21

A mechanism exists that allows students to refer
patients to other students. Students speak to the
Student Clinic Coordinator and refer the patient back to
the waiting list. The Student Clinic Coordinator will then
allocate the patient to an appropriate student.

19

The provider must implement a process for
the training and calibration of supervisors
that must be adhered to across all elements
of the programme.

However, we will review our categorisation and
allocation of patients as part of the work for our new
curriculum, which emphasises increased and enhanced
clinical experience for students.
An OSCE examiner training website has been
developed and is available to all examiners from both
the University and Trust. Access can be arranged for
the GDC Inspectors if required.

Annual Monitoring
2020/21

16

Staff calibration sessions have been held for
Restorative and South Bristol staff, and further
sessions are being planned for other departments.
Our use of CAFS to monitor and feedback on staff
grading behaviours was introduced to further support
staff calibration.

19

The provider should consider using
technology, where available, to assist in
achieving consistency in the training and
calibration of supervisors.

We are working with our Trust colleagues to ensure
their support for greater staff calibration.
An OSCE examiner training website has been
developed and is available to all examiners from both
the University and Trust.

Annual Monitoring
2021/22

Our use of CAFS to monitor and feedback on staff
grading behaviours was introduced to further support
staff calibration.

Observations from the provider on content of report
We were very grateful to the inspectors for their time and attention during the visit. We welcome their findings, many of which reflect our
own observations and represent work in progress. Nevertheless, the inspection gave us cause to reflect and further impetus to enhance
the programme and our students’ experience.

Recommendations to the GDC
Education associates’ recommendation
Date of reinspection / next regular monitoring exercise

Qualification continues to be sufficient for holders to apply for
registration as a dentist with the General Dental Council
New BDS curriculum to be inspected in 2020

17

ANNEX ONE
Inspection purpose and process
1.

As part of its duty to protect patients and promote high standards within the professions
it regulates, the General Dental Council (GDC) quality assures the education and
training of student dentists and dental care professionals (DCPs) at institutions whose
qualifications enable the holder to apply for registration with the GDC. It also quality
assures new qualifications where it is intended that the qualification will lead to
registration. The aim of this quality assurance activity is to ensure that institutions
produce a new registrant who has demonstrated, on graduation, that they have met the
learning outcomes required for registration with the GDC. This ensures that students
who obtain a qualification leading to registration are fit to practise at the level of a safe
beginner.

2.

Inspections are a key element of the GDC’s quality assurance activity. They enable a
recommendation to be made to the Council of the GDC regarding the ‘sufficiency’ of the
programme for registration as a dentist and ‘approval’ of the programme for registration
as a dental care professional. The GDC’s powers are derived under Part II, Section 9 of
the Dentists Act 1984 (as amended).

3.

The GDC document ‘Standards for Education’ 2nd edition 3 is the framework used to
evaluate qualifications. There are 21 Requirements in three distinct Standards, against
which each qualification is assessed.

4.

The education provider is requested to undertake a self-evaluation of the programme
against the individual Requirements under the Standards for Education. This involves
stating whether each Requirement is ‘met’, ‘partly met’ or ‘not met’ and to provide
evidence in support of their evaluation. The inspection panel examines this evidence,
may request further documentary evidence and gathers further evidence from
discussions with staff and students. The panel will reach a decision on each
Requirement, using the following descriptors:

A Requirement is met if:
“There is sufficient appropriate evidence derived from the inspection process. This
evidence provides the inspectors with broad confidence that the provider demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students is supportive
of documentary evidence and the evidence is robust, consistent and not contradictory.
There may be minor deficiencies in the evidence supplied but these are likely to be
inconsequential.”
A Requirement is partly met if:
“Evidence derived from the inspection process is either incomplete or lacks detail and, as
such, fails to convince the inspection panel that the provider fully demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students may not fully
support the evidence submitted or there may be contradictory information in the evidence
provided. There is, however, some evidence of compliance and it is likely that either (a) the
appropriate evidence can be supplied in a short time frame, or, (b) any deficiencies
identified can be addressed and evidenced in the annual monitoring process.”
A Requirement is not met if
3

http://www.gdc-uk.org/Aboutus/education/Documents/Standards%20for%20Education.pdf

18

“The provider cannot provide evidence to demonstrate a Requirement or the evidence
provided is not convincing. The information gathered at the inspection through meetings
with staff and students does not support the evidence provided or the evidence is
inconsistent and/or incompatible with other findings. The deficiencies identified are such as
to give rise to serious concern and will require an immediate action plan from the provider.
The consequences of not meeting a Requirement in terms of the overall sufficiency of a
programme will depend upon the compliance of the provider across the range of
Requirements and the possible implications for public protection”
5.

Inspection reports highlight areas of strength and draw attention to areas requiring
improvement and development, including actions that are required to be undertaken by
the provider. Where an action is needed for a Requirement to be met, the term ‘must’ is
used to describe the obligation on the provider to undertake this action. For these
actions the inspectors may stipulate a specific timescale by which the action must be
completed or when an update on progress must be provided. In their observations on
the content of the report, the provider should confirm the anticipated date by which
these actions will be completed. Where an action would improve how a Requirement is
met, the term ‘should’ is used and for these actions there will be no due date stipulated.
Providers will be asked to report on the progress in addressing the required actions
through the annual monitoring process. Serious concerns about a lack of progress may
result in further inspections or other quality assurance activity.

6.

The QA team aims to send an initial draft of the inspection report to the provider within
two months of the conclusion of the inspection. The provider of the qualification has the
opportunity to provide factual corrections on the draft report. Following the production of
the final report the provider is asked to submit observations on, or objections to, the
report and the actions listed. Where the inspection panel have recommended that the
programme is sufficient for registration, the Council of the GDC have delegated
responsibility to the GDC Registrar to consider the recommendations of the panel.
Should an inspection panel not be able to recommend ‘sufficiency’ or ‘approval’, the
report and observations would be presented to the Council of the GDC for
consideration.

7.

The final version of the report and the provider’s observations are published on the GDC
website.

19

