Education Quality Assurance Inspection Report
Education
Provider/Awarding
Body
University of Glasgow

Outcome of Inspection

Programme/Award

Inspection Dates

Bachelor of Dental
Surgery (BDS)

24 April 2019

Recommended that the BDS
continues to be sufficient for the
graduating cohort to register as a
dentist.

1

*Full details of the inspection process can be found in the annex*
Inspection summary
Remit and purpose of inspection:

Learning Outcomes:

Inspection referencing the Standards for
Education to determine approval of the
award for the purpose of registration with
the General Dental Council as a dentist.
Risk based: focused on Requirements 4, 9,
11, 13, 14, 15 and 19
Preparing for Practice (Dentist)

Programme inspection date:

24 April 2019

Examination inspection date:

17 May 2019 (Exam Board)

Inspection panel:

Ben Walsh (Chair and Non-registrant
Member)
Fariha Hussain (Dentist Member)
Bal Chana (DCP Member)

GDC Staff:

James Marshall (Quality Assurance
Manager, Lead)
Marlene Ledgister (Education & Quality
Assurance Officer)

Executive Summary
The BDS inspection undertaken at the University of Glasgow was a risk-based inspection
looking at specific areas of focus identified by the GDC’s Education & Quality Assurance
team in 2018. Information considered when identifying potential or actual risks included
annual monitoring returns, previous inspection reports (and progress against any actions)
and responses to wider recommendations in the GDC Annual Review of Education.
The inspection focused on Requirements 4, 9, 11, 13, 14, 15 and 19 and specific areas
within those Requirements which are detailed below.
It was clear from the outset that the programme team were well prepared and had a good
understanding of what was required for the inspection.
The standard and range of information presented both prior to, and on the day of the
inspection was impressive, as was the readiness of all staff and students involved on the
day.
As in the previous inspection, the programme team demonstrated strong leadership, with
good and effective communication structures in place that were clear to managers, staff and
students.

2

Leaders demonstrated the existence of strong partnerships with key parties. These are
instrumental to the School’s success; the changing face of the NHS and changing social
demographics being the driving force for further developments being explored.
Strong leadership was particularly evidenced in the outreach programme, although the team
felt that management responsibility of the outreach programme overall, relied heavily on the
programme coordinator. During the inspection meetings, students gave very positive
feedback about their outreach experience.
Students were well presented, engaging and confidently articulated a good level of
understanding of the expectations over the five years of the course.
One of the key strengths highlighted in the inspection was the positive impact of the
mentoring programme, which was strengthening relationships and successfully supporting
students throughout their programme. The School demonstrated a supportive culture.
Students stated that they felt that staff were very approachable for support with academic
and pastoral issues.
The team felt that some work should be done to ensure that clinical competencies are
standardised to ensure equitable assessment.
The School was able to demonstrate positive evidence of the use and impact of a
centralised system being incorporated and used for monitoring students’ progress.

3

Background and overview of Qualification
Annual intake

Programme duration

Current 2019-2020 session: New BDS1 78;
BDS2 85; BDS3 74; BDS4 85; BDS5 76.
These numbers can increase by 5-10 in
BDS3 with intake from international partner
Schools.
Weeks of teaching excluding examination
blocks:
BDS 1 – 22
BDS 2 – 39
BDS 3 – 38
BDS 4 – 30
BDS 5 – 36

Format of programme

Number of providers delivering the
programme

An average of 36 for the clinical years (BDS
2-5) and 22 weeks for BDS 1
Year
1: basic knowledge, clinic attendance,
shadowing, communication skills,
transitioning and 'principles of
professionalism'
2: knowledge and simulated clinical
experience, introductory clinical experience
3: direct patient treatment, clinic attendance
(including Paediatric Outreach), further
simulated training and knowledge based
teaching
4: direct patient treatment, clinic
attendance, knowledge based teaching,
elective project
5: direct patient treatment, clinic
attendance, outreach, placements, special
study modules, knowledge updates
The main provider is the University of
Glasgow and we work in partnership with
bodies such as NHS secondary care
services, Health Boards and NHS
Education for Scotland.

The panel wishes to thank the staff, students, and external stakeholders involved with the
University of Glasgow BDS programme for their co-operation and assistance with the
inspection.

4

Outcome of relevant Requirements1

Standard One
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Met
Met
Met
Met
Met
Met
Met
Met
Standard Two

9
11
12

Met
Met
Met
Standard Three

13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

Met
Met
Met
Met
Met
Met
Met
Met
Met

All Requirements within the Standards for Education are applicable for all programmes. Specific
Requirements will be examined through inspection activity through identification via risk analysis processes or
due to current thematic reviews.

1

5

Standard 1 – Protecting patients
Providers must be aware of their duty to protect the public. Providers must ensure that
patient safety is paramount, and care of patients is of an appropriate standard. Any risk
to the safety of patients and their care by students must be minimised.
Requirement 4: When providing patient care and services, providers must ensure that
students are supervised appropriately according to the activity and the student’s stage
of development. (Requirement Met)
Staffing changes have been managed well. The School evidenced a good working relationship
with the NHS, working to achieve creative solutions to avoid any detrimental impact on
students. Gaps have been filled without risks to Individual Learning Outcomes (ILO) or the
curriculum. Successful pre-arrangements were also in place to cover an upcoming staffing loss
which included sourcing sessional teaching staff to ensure that there was no impact on
students.
The oral medicine timetable had been reviewed with funding redirected to support teaching.
The School faced a challenge with recruiting to the post of senior lecturer in radiology and the
post was re-appointed as a part time teaching consultant in collaboration with the NHS.
Recruitment was in progress regarding a replacement.
As a result of extractions going onto the risk register, two additional staff members were
allocated across primary care and the oral surgery department.
Levels of supervision were found to be variable. In restorative main clinics the groups are
supervised by a mixture of General Dental Practitioners (GDP) and School staff with a ratio of
around 4-6 students to one member of staff. For non-surgical extractions the ratio is 1:4 and for
minor oral surgery the ratio is 1:1. For non-surgical oral surgery the ratio is 1:2-4 students.
Students go to outreach in groups of 5 or 6. Student-staff ratio in outreach is good at 1:3-4.
Good nursing support is available with two supervisors on clinic.
However, the inspection team concluded that that outreach cover was not well structured or
planned. Arrangements for planned leave were not in place, with the outreach coordinator
being the main source of cover. This should be addressed with more robust contingency
planning.
During the inspection meetings, students reported that overall they were happy with the level of
supervision that they received. Supervision has allowed them to understand their limits, not
take risks and understand that some tasks need to be checked. Students stated that
supervision supported them to identify areas where they might struggle, with LIFTUPP Review
panels with targeted training if needed. Intensive sessions are put in place for students who
are behind. Students also reported that staff are open regarding concerns, operating an opendoor policy. Students expressed that the induction set clear expectations and prepared them
well for the course. They spoke positively about the Vocational Training Graduate Interface
meeting. When asked what they might improve about the programme, the only negative
feedback was that some lecture recordings were not always available on Moodle.
The School delivers a well-structured and developed mentor programme whereby the allocated
mentors stay with the student throughout training. There has been an introduction of Year 4
student mentors to the BDS1 mentor programme. It was also reported that student support
committees are also in place. When questioned during the inspection meetings, students
provided very positive feedback about the impact of the mentoring programme on their learning
experience.

6

It was evident that the mentoring programme has a positive impact on the student experience.
Each mentor is allocated five students and student-mentor meetings take place three times per
year throughout the BDS programme. This gives an opportunity for a longitudinal view of
students’ development throughout the BDS programme. The mentoring programme places an
emphasis on reflection which supports students in their academic development as they
progress through the Programme.
There were many applications from BDS4 students for peer mentoring positions; the mentor
role includes a strong pastoral element as students identified mentors as the first port of call
when any issues arise. This also contributes to the personal development of the teaching staff
and aids their reflection. There is also a programme of peer assisted learning, enabling junior
year groups to learn from senior years. Mentor meetings are conducted as a group, but one to
one sessions can take place if requested. Where issues are identified, mentors signpost to the
most appropriate sources for support.
During the meeting with students, they explained their awareness of who to go to for support if
they are struggling with any aspect of the programme. Students stated that they can meet with
School staff to discuss progress in every clinic, and again there is an option for a formal
meeting if requested. Heads of Year are also supportive with any problems.
A range of support mechanisms are in place for students who are struggling with either
academic or pastoral and social issues.

Standard 2 – Quality evaluation and review of the programme
The provider must have in place effective policy and procedures for the monitoring and
review of the programme.
Requirement 9: The provider must have a framework in place that details how it
manages the quality of the programme which includes making appropriate changes to
ensure the curriculum continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and adapts
to changing legislation and external guidance. There must be a clear statement about
where responsibility lies for this function. (Requirement Met)
The programme leader reported that the School undertakes regular ‘horizon scanning’ to
maintain an awareness of changes in education. The Head of School also sits on the Board for
Academic Dentistry in Scotland which informs the School’s response to the changing external
landscape. For example, responding to changes in regulations regarding the Test of
Knowledge as part of vocational training posts.
The programme leader was also able to demonstrate that programme changes have been
made in response to changes in legislation. When Fitness to Practice (FtP) was implemented,
significant steps were taken to apply the necessary greater emphasis on professionalism. The
Medical Ethicist provides this teaching for dentistry, medicine and nursing. Speciality leads
also inform the programme team of upcoming changes, who then disseminate this information
to other staff.
Regarding recent classification changes in periodontal classification guidelines, this year
students will be taught within the new guidelines, but marks will be awarded for both
periodontal classification schemes. Students were informed of the changes, and online
webinar sessions were delivered. Teachers were made aware and training sessions were
arranged and attended.

7

As part of the School’s quality assurance process, annual course monitoring also ensures that
changes are implemented in the curriculum.
The inspection team found that there was good evidence of communication structures in place
for escalation of concerns. The School has responded to external examiner feedback in
relation to the BDS2 preclinical skills assessment. External examiners wanted students to resit all 3 parts of the assessment if they failed one or more of the three parts. This is now in
place.
Requirement 11: Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external quality
assurance procedures. External quality assurance should include the use of external
examiners, who should be familiar with the GDC learning outcomes and their context
and QAA guidelines should be followed where applicable. Patient and/or customer
feedback must be collected and used to inform programme development. (Requirement
Met)
The School demonstrated a range of ongoing internal and external quality assurance
procedures. The Dental Education Committee meeting takes place every two months with all
Year Leads attending and tabling papers. The Annual Monitoring Report is presented to
formally report on the previous year’s performance across the course, and patient feedback is
also considered at this meeting. This meeting also receives input from the Quality Assurance
Officer, and Education Leads present reports about their specific areas.
The Quality Assurance Board meets to identify issues and good practice. There is a
programme of University-led internal Periodic Subject Review every five years, and also
External Examiner reports, NSS reports and various mechanisms for gathering feedback. In
addition to this, the University requires the School to report on attrition and progression data.
Staff reported that feedback is included in the quality management framework and collected
from students through staff-student liaison committees, patients and via outreach. Feedback is
ongoing and feeds into the annual course review. The Staff Student Liaison Committee (SSLC)
provided feedback that is used to inform programme development. The SSLCs across all years
prepare a report which feeds into the Annual Monitoring Report.
The inspection highlighted several examples where feedback had informed changes to the
programme. For example, feedback from BDS1 students about mentor training led to a review
of the mentor programme; this resulted in changes to the content and delivery of this
programme and the inclusion of Year 4 student peer mentors. Other examples included
changes to a Year 4 exam as a result of student feedback. Feedback received about missing
nutrition lectures was also addressed, resulting in remedial teaching. The School sought
feedback to determine how to address student concerns about preparation for a Year 4 case
presentation exam. The suggestion to reduce the importance of the case presentation and
introduce an additional assessment was then explored.
Additionally, the School is making changes to the online transition course for incoming BDS1
students to increase its relevance and specificity to the BDS programme. Modifications to
Moodle are also in progress with the aim of making the site more user-friendly for students.
All students are encouraged to take part in the National Student Survey (NSS) and the School
has one of the highest feedback returns. There is an open forum for class representatives, who
feed into the SSLC. Class representatives demonstrated a good insight into the feedback
reporting structure.

8

Feedback from External Examiners (EE) is acted upon. For example, EEs had recommended
that the number of examiners carrying out final assessments in the Case Presentation Exam
should be reduced to reduce the risk of disparity between assessors. The number was reduced
to six, the minimum needed for the cohort size. EEs also contributed to the review of the case
presentation process.
Outreach provision operates with strong partnerships within the School, Deaneries and Trusts.
When setting up new outreach centres, a gateway process was put in place to ensure that the
needs of the area were reflected.
Quality assurance of outreach provision starts with a good induction. Staff are invited to the
School’s internal training day to support integration into the in-house systems. There are two to
three outreach study days per year to ensure consistency between staff. Outreach staff are
also invited to attend the education days and attend the School to examine.
LIFTUPP allows every patient interaction to be recorded with feedback. The School identified
that the language was not particularly friendly for patients, so wording was amended and
presented to them. Feedback is positive; complaints are infrequent but used as learning points.
Standard 3– Student assessment
Assessment must be reliable and valid. The choice of assessment method must be
appropriate to demonstrate achievement of the GDC learning outcomes. Assessors
must be fit to perform the assessment task.
Requirement 13: To award the qualification, providers must be assured that students
have demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes, and that they
are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner. Evidence must be provided that
demonstrates this assurance, which should be supported by a coherent approach to the
principles of assessment referred to in these standards. (Requirement Met)
The School is making effective use of LIFTUPP, evidencing good tracking and monitoring of
learner performance and progression, with action planning to address issues where identified.
Students undertake a number of competency tests throughout the years. Information regarding
this is given to students at the start of the year. The assessment is carried out by one assessor
in the clinical setting, and there is a detailed list of criteria for each competency assessment.
However, it was reported that there are no criteria or standardisation for the types of
treatments.
The decision regarding students’ completion of clinical attainment is a little vague, as there
does not appear to be any specific baseline measure, and therefore some decisions may not
be reliable. In cases where the number of clinical attainments has not met the threshold, the
overall performance of the student is analysed. The outcome would be agreed at the Clinical
Development Panel.
Supervisors are trained in the competencies, and support for assessor calibration includes a
film of a competence assessment simulation. Staff added that despite calibration it is difficult to
standardise. The inspection team were told that the use of two assessors had been
considered, but the number of staff required is too high for the School.
The School added that the EE would not be present for any in-course assessment.
Requirement 14: The provider must have in place management systems to plan, monitor
and centrally record the assessment of students, including the monitoring of clinical

9

and/or technical experience, throughout the programme against each of the learning
outcomes. (Requirement Met)
The previous inspection of the programme identified that the programme would benefit from a
centralised system for longitudinal assessment. As a result, LITFUPP has been successfully
incorporated as a summative tool for assessment, following University approval and a gradual
implementation process. School leaders are now exploring the development of a Scottish
Dental School’s users’ group.
During the inspection the School were able to demonstrate that they are now making good
progress in the use of LIFTUPP as recommended. Some minor technical issues have been
overcome and use of the centralised system is now transitioning into a tool for summative
assessment.
Staff stated that they are seeing the value of the system in both quality and consistency.
Students are very much encouraged to sign in and engage with the system supporting with
their target setting and monitoring achievement. LIFTUPP gives students a longitudinal view of
their developments and guides teachers to give both qualitative and quantitative feedback on
student performance. During the meetings with students, they said that they were seeing what
a valuable tool it is. LIFTUPP user groups include staff from a range of roles.
Outreach staff were finding the use of LIFTUPP reliable and valuable in supporting them to
monitor and track individual student progress.
LIFTUPP review provides early identification of at-risk students who are falling short in a
particular area, and steps can be put in place to address these. Student progression is formally
reviewed by the Clinical Development Panel (CDP). Coordinators will be issued with a list of
students whose progress requires discussion. Tracking was demonstrated as part of the
inspection. Using LIFTUPP enables staff to see how other staff members are scoring. Staff
reported that they use multiple sources of data to get an overall picture of students’
performance and whether they are fit to graduate. Students are clearly advised that they may
pass exams and still not be able to graduate if for example adequate experience and
attendance are not evidenced.
Data from different subject areas is reviewed by the LIFTUPP Development Panel (LDP), with
discussion around performance and scores. Consistency in the type and number of procedures
completed by each student is then compared with the guidance and class averages. If a
student is below average, this will be flagged before the next LIFTUPP panel. Targeted training
will be put in place and monitored for improvement.
The School have target numbers of procedures, but these are not absolute and act only as
guidelines. Setting minimum absolute numbers had been considered in the past, but the
School felt that this would not adequately allow for differentiation of student competence. The
LIFTUPP panel and the year teams consider all three aspects – numbers, level and quality of
performance and consistency of performance.
Concerns raised at the CDP are relayed to tutors, year team leads or the Director of Education
in accordance with the level and severity of risk. This might result in informal FtP meetings or
more formal warnings. Action plans are drawn up and monitored for improvement.
Some pre-clinical skills training is done with other members of the dental team. An element of
shared care is performed in the Coatbridge Outreach Centre. The School is looking at how
periodontology teaching can be shared between the hygiene therapy and BDS programmes.

10

Students said that they felt that they were assessed fairly both in the hospital and in outreach;
LIFTUPP is standardised and marking must be agreed by both student and supervisor before
being signed off. Students expressed that they had occasionally felt that their marks did not
accurately reflect the standard of their work, but such instances were minor, infrequent and
had not impacted on outcomes. Students said they felt able to challenge feedback or grades
with the Year Lead and assessor. Competency tests are designed to be standardised as much
as possible; however, this is more of a challenge in outreach with a greater range of assessors
and supervisors.
Requirement 15: Students must have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and should undertake each activity relating to patient care on
sufficient occasions to enable them to develop the skills and the level of competency to
achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes. (Requirement Met)
Challenges exist with patient supply from particular groups of patients and the impact of
changing social demographics. A range of strategies are in place to ensure patients are
available. Programme leaders regularly meet with senior management to discuss patient
supply, operating within strict guidelines for what is appropriate for students. The School liaises
with local GPs and dentists, achieving positive results in patient uptake. Advertising within the
University is also undertaken to obtain new patients from staff and students. Securing sufficient
numbers of patients for oral surgery, especially with extractions, is always a common problem.
The Oral Health Improvement Student Society visits colleges etc to provide oral health advice
and information on services offered at the dental hospital.
Staff stated that students would know well in advance if they were falling short of clinical
experience. It is very rare that students are unable to graduate due to shortages in clinical
experience.
In outreach, staff reported that there were issues in flow of appropriate patients, but that the
School was on the whole looking at innovative and targeted ways to address this. Obtaining
patients for extractions was problematic in the early year groups, but procedures are in place
to manage the situation. Access to the emergency treatment centre is available in the final year
and the School has put on additional endodontic clinics for students who are struggling.
An extended induction includes involvement in clinical work. In Year 2 students undertake
simulated work and some assessment takes place with Hygiene Therapy students, with an
introduction to patients at the end of this period. Extractions are undertaken at the end of year
2 and beginning of Year 3, and students experience their own patients, specialist clinics and
paediatric outreach during Year 4. Learning is consolidated in Year 5 which includes
attendance at primary care emergency clinics and outreach clinics where they build up
experience of extractions, gaining in confidence and competency. OSCE exams are taken
before graduation, along with mentorship sign off. The ‘yellow card’ flag system is used to flag
up issues that are not included on the OSCE mark sheet to enable discussion at the Board of
Examiners.
Students report that the outreach programme is well-structured, and the combination of theory
and practical work builds knowledge and provides a lot of experience. There is a good focus on
reflection and they take responsibility for their own work. Latter year students are given more
independence and feel prepared. The written examination at the end of Year 4 reduces the
pressure and allows students to focus on clinical work in Year 5. The outreach experience
allows the students to follow a patient through treatment, giving a good view of the patient’s
journey as opposed to the individual treatment at the hospital. The student to staff ratio is
smaller in outreach and things tend to run faster. Outreach also gives opportunities to work
with different people, developing relationships and teamwork skills.
11

Students shared that they are given plenty of opportunity to work with other groups of students,
especially in outreach. They regularly work with other dental team members and have received
talks from different technicians. Students shared that they are taught about the roles of other
members of the dental team via Scope of Practice lectures.
Requirement 19: Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills, experience and
training to undertake the task of assessment, including appropriate general or specialist
registration with a UK regulatory body. Examiners/ assessors should have received
training in equality and diversity relevant for their role. (Requirement Met)
The School evidences that staff have access to a range of training and development activities.
Education days take place bi-annually at the School and attendance is mandatory for all
University staff. It is also strongly encouraged for honorary staff. GDPs and outreach staff are
invited to attend, with Vocational Trainers (VT) invited as speakers. Staff reported that these
days are also used for calibration, thus maximising the benefit of attendance of the range of
delivery staff.
Restorative training days are arranged which ensure that staff are kept up to date with (any
changing) technical skills and requirements. Training and mentorship are put in place for new
staff members. Leading up to assessments, examiners have access to training exercises.
Education training sessions include the principles of learning and assessments with material
on the Virtual Learning Environment (VLE), together with standard setting training and
assessor training. On occasion where a variation in marking was identified, remedial training
was put in place to address this.
University staff are required to gain the Postgraduate Certificate in Teaching, which is
facilitated by the University. In addition, training and mentorship is put in place for new staff
and study days are included in the scheduled timetable. The Deanery introduced a scheme for
VT trainers called ‘How we teach it’ where staff from different Schools go to speak with VT
trainers.
Outreach staff are very much involved in the education days and feel supported by the School.
In-house training for the outreach staff is also arranged, with the inclusion of calibration
exercises and is recorded as CPD. Staff are also invited into the School to observe students in
Years 2-5, which supports calibration. The outreach coordinator explained that an outreach
peer observation process had been piloted, which now needs to be rolled out which will also
support calibration and development.
Outreach staff demonstrated cohesion and were very positive about training and development,
which was reported to include both formal and informal induction and a period shadowing an
experienced tutor.
School leaders reported that equality and diversity training is mandatory for all staff.

12

Summary of Action
Req.
number
4

9

13

Action

Observations & response from Provider

The School should ensure that plans are put This is being taken forward with NHS Education for
in place for a more formalised approach to
Scotland (NES) and the clinical directors of the Heath
providing cover in outreach.
Boards. It was discussed at a meeting with the Dental
School and the Clinical Directors from the outreach
centre health boards on 6/8/2019. Discussions will
continue.
Examples of Annual Course Monitoring
The Annual Course Monitoring Reports for each year
reports to be submitted for additional
from the 2017-18 academic session are attached. The
supporting information.
overarching Dental School report, prepared by the
Quality Assurance Officer, that summarises all five of
the individual year reports and is submitted to the
School of Medicine, Dentistry and Nursing, is also
included for that academic session.
The Annual Course Monitoring Reports for each year
from the 2018-2019 academic session are attached.
These are labelled draft at present as they require
ratification at the next Dental Education Committee in
August 2019 and the following Dental School Executive
Committee meeting. The overarching summary report,
prepared by the Quality Assurance Officer, is also
included in draft ready for presentation at the next
Dental Education Committee in August. Following this it
will be ratified at the Dental School Executive
Committee before submission to the School of
Medicine, Dentistry and Nursing.
Copy of 2019 Progression Meeting to be
The minutes from the Clinical Development and
submitted in order to verify that tracking and Progression Panel meeting 1 May 2019 to look at
monitoring of learner progression is robust,
LIFTUPP data (which includes the final panel meeting
ensuring that all students are ‘safely’ going
for BDS5) are attached. Names of students have been
through. This is the first year of using
redacted but we can supply the original minutes
including names if required.

Due date
Annual Monitoring
2020/2021

Annual Monitoring
2020/2021

Annual Monitoring
2020/2021

13

19

LIFTUPP to do this, so it would be good to
see this.
The School should review processes to
ensure consistency of assessors, especially
with the inclusion of outreach provision.

Following this, final checks were made on actions from
the CDP meeting prior to the exam board meetings.
This will be reviewed as part of our quality assurance
process and will be looked at in more detail via Dental
Education Committee and the Course/Year Teams
group.

Annual Monitoring
2020/2021

14

Observations from the provider on content of report
We would like to thank the inspection team for their approach to our inspection. Whilst it was thorough, the team conducted the inspection
in a way that was supportive to both staff and students. The content of the report is positive and encouraging. It will allow us, in turn, to
encourage staff in areas where good practice has been highlighted. We welcome review of our programme and find the comments about
areas for action very useful. We can use these to focus on activities within all the different committees and groups within our structure to
further enhance the course. The action for a more formalised approach to providing cover in outreach is very helpful for us as we liaise
with NES and Outreach Health Boards who provide this service.

Recommendations to the GDC
Education associates’ recommendation
Date of reinspection / next regular monitoring exercise

BDS qualification continues to be sufficient for holders to apply for
registration as a dentist with the General Dental Council.
Annual Monitoring 2020/2021

15

Annex 1
Inspection purpose and process

1. As part of its duty to protect patients and promote high standards within the professions it
regulates, the General Dental Council (GDC) quality assures the education and training of
student dentists and dental care professionals (DCPs) at institutions whose qualifications
enable the holder to apply for registration with the GDC. It also quality assures new
qualifications where it is intended that the qualification will lead to registration. The aim of
this quality assurance activity is to ensure that institutions produce a new registrant who has
demonstrated, on graduation, that they have met the learning outcomes required for
registration with the GDC. This ensures that students who obtain a qualification leading to
registration are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner.
2. Inspections are a key element of the GDC’s quality assurance activity. They enable a
recommendation to be made to the Council of the GDC regarding the ‘sufficiency’ of the
programme for registration as a dentist and ‘approval’ of the programme for registration as a
dental care professional. The GDC’s powers are derived under Part II, Section 9 of the
Dentists Act 1984 (as amended).
3. The GDC document ‘Standards for Education’ 2nd edition1 is the framework used to
evaluate qualifications. There are 21 Requirements in three distinct Standards, against
which each qualification is assessed.
4. The education provider is requested to undertake a self-evaluation of the programme
against the individual Requirements under the Standards for Education. This involves stating
whether each Requirement is ‘met’, ‘partly met’ or ‘not met’ and to provide evidence in
support of their evaluation. The inspection panel examines this evidence, may request
further documentary evidence and gathers further evidence from discussions with staff and
students. The panel will reach a decision on each Requirement, using the following
descriptors:
A Requirement is met if:
“There is sufficient appropriate evidence derived from the inspection process. This evidence
provides the inspectors with broad confidence that the provider demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students is supportive of
documentary evidence and the evidence is robust, consistent and not contradictory. There
may be minor deficiencies in the evidence supplied but these are likely to be
inconsequential.”
A Requirement is partly met if:
“Evidence derived from the inspection process is either incomplete or lacks detail and, as
such, fails to convince the inspection panel that the provider fully demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students may not fully
support the evidence submitted or there may be contradictory information in the evidence
provided. There is, however, some evidence of compliance and it is likely that either (a) the
appropriate evidence can be supplied in a short time frame, or, (b) any deficiencies identified
can be addressed and evidenced in the annual monitoring process.”
A Requirement is not met if:

16

“The provider cannot provide evidence to demonstrate a Requirement or the evidence
provided is not convincing. The information gathered at the inspection through meetings with
staff and students does not support the evidence provided or the evidence is inconsistent
and/or incompatible with other findings. The deficiencies identified are such as to give rise to
serious concern and will require an immediate action plan from the provider. The
consequences of not meeting a Requirement in terms of the overall sufficiency of a
programme will depend upon the compliance of the provider across the range of
Requirements and the possible implications for public protection”
5. Inspection reports highlight areas of strength and draw attention to areas requiring
improvement and development, including actions that are required to be undertaken by the
provider. Where an action is needed for a Requirement to be met, the term ‘must’ is used to
describe the obligation on the provider to undertake this action. For these actions the
inspectors may stipulate a specific timescale by which the action must be completed or when
an update on progress must be provided. In their observations on the content of the report,
the provider should confirm the anticipated date by which these actions will be completed.
Where an action would improve how a Requirement is met, the term ‘should’ is used and for
these actions there will be no due date stipulated. Providers will be asked to report on the
progress in addressing the required actions through the annual monitoring process. Serious
concerns about a lack of progress may result in further inspections or other quality
assurance activity.
6. The QA team aims to send an initial draft of the inspection report to the provider within two
months of the conclusion of the inspection. The provider of the qualification has the
opportunity to provide factual corrections on the draft report. Following the production of the
final report the provider is asked to submit observations on, or objections to, the report and
the actions listed. Where the inspection panel have recommended that the programme is
sufficient for registration, the Council of the GDC have delegated responsibility to the GDC
Registrar to consider the recommendations of the panel. Should an inspection panel not be
able to recommend ‘sufficiency’ or ‘approval’, the report and observations would be
presented to the Council of the GDC for consideration.
7. The final version of the report and the provider’s observations are published on the GDC
website.

17

