Education Quality Assurance Inspection Report
Education
Provider/Awarding
Body
University of
Birmingham

Outcome of Inspection

Programme/Award

Inspection Dates

Bachelor of Dental
Surgery (BDS)

13 &14 February 2019
(Programme inspection)
3-4 June 2019 (Exam
Inspection)

Recommended that the BDS
continues to be sufficient for the
graduating cohort to register as
dentists.

*Full details of the inspection process can be found in the annex*
Inspection summary
Remit and purpose of inspection:

Learning Outcomes:

Inspection referencing the Standards for
Education to determine approval of the
award for the purpose of registration with
the GDC as a dentist
Risk based: Focused on Requirements 4, 7,
9, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 19 and 21
Preparing for Practice (Dentist)

Programme inspection dates:

13 &14 February 2019

Exam inspection dates:

3 &4 June 2019

Inspection panel:

Cindy Mackie (Chair and Non-registrant
Member)
Joanne Brindley (DCP Member)
Angela Magee (Dentist Member)
Khalid Mushtaq (Dentist Member)

GDC Staff:

Rachael Mendel (GDC Quality Assurance
Officer)
Amy Mullins-Downes (GDC Quality
Assurance Manager)

The inspection undertaken at the University of Birmingham was risk-based focusing on
specific areas of their BDS programme. The GDC’s Education and Quality Assurance (EQA)
team and a panel of Education Associates (hereafter referred to as “the panel”, “the team” or
“associates”) undertook an independent evaluation of information available to determine the
content of each inspection. The information considered included annual monitoring returns,
previous inspection reports (including progress against actions), responses to wider
recommendations in the GDC Annual Review of Education, Fitness to Practise data and
complaints received.
Following this assessment, it was decided that the inspection panel focus on Requirements
4, 7, 9, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 19 and 21.
The panel noted the significant and positive changes that have taken place since the
previous inspection. It was evident to the panel that the leadership team had been proactive
and extremely dedicated in progressing the previous recommendations and staff have been
working in a collaborative manner. We observed a cohesive and effective working
relationship at senior and staff level, one which has ensured students have and are being
supported throughout the programme. The panel also noted the excellent facilities and
additional resources now available to the students, such as the stress management and
resilience programme and the extension of the programme timing to ensure students gain as
much practical experience as possible.

The panel recognised and were impressed by the support and training provided to staff and
how the programme is working with the wider medical team and other faculties to support
staff training and development. This has provided a positive foundation to ensure the staff
team are suitably equipped to support the programme.
The team would like to commend the programme on the proactive manner in which patient
feedback is now collected and utilised. Considerable progress has taken place in this area
since the last GDC visitation in 2014. The students now obtain feedback from approximately
100 direct patient contact sessions per week. This is collected via the Computer Assessment
& Feedback System (CAFS) system and is currently student driven, under the supervision of
staff.
The panel wishes to thank the staff, students, and external stakeholders involved with the BDS
programme for their co-operation and assistance with the inspection.

Background and overview of qualification:
Annual intake:
Programme duration:
Format of programme:

71 students
193 weeks over 5 years
Year
BDS 1: basic biological sciences,
professionalism & foundations of dental
practice, clinic attendance/shadowing &
reflective logbooks.
BDS 2: Craniofacial and oral biology, dental
public health, fundamentals of clinical
practice including simulated clinical
experience, clinical orientation and basic
clinical practice exercises (e.g. infection
control, administration of LA, scaling and
prophylaxis, impression taking etc.).
BDS 3: Simulated clinical procedures, direct
patient treatment in clinical practice and
specialty areas, dental pathology/
immunology/materials/radiography,
introduction to human diseases
BDS 4: Advanced simulated procedures,
intermediate clinical direct patient care in
general practice and specialty disciplines,
oral pathology, radiography, hospital
placements and residency, clinical human
diseases.
BDS 5: Advanced clinical practice, dental
public health in practice, radiography/ology,
specialty clinical care, outreach
placements.

Number of providers delivering the
programme:

9 different Trusts (human diseases)
4 different Trusts for placement provision.
Major Trust is Birmingham Community
Health Trust, where placements are
provided at the Dental Hospital and also in
10 different community dental clinics.

Outcome of relevant Requirements1
Standard One
1

Met

2

Met

3

Met

4

Met

5

Met

6

Met

7

Met

8

Met
Standard Two

9

Met

10

Met

11

Met

12

Met
Standard Three

13

Met

14

Met

15

Met

16

Met

17

Met

18

Met

19

Met

20

Met

21

Met

All Requirements within the Standards for Education are applicable for all programmes unless otherwise
stated. Specific requirements will be examined through inspection activity and will be identified via risk
analysis processes or due to current thematic reviews.

1

Standard 1 – Protecting patients
Providers must be aware of their duty to protect the public. Providers must ensure that
patient safety is paramount and care of patients is of an appropriate standard. Any risk
to the safety of patients and their care by students must be minimised.
Requirement 1: Students must provide patient care only when they have demonstrated
adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical procedures, the student should be
assessed as competent in the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 2: Providers must have systems in place to inform patients that they may
be treated by students and the possible implications of this. Patient agreement to
treatment by a student must be obtained and recorded prior to treatment commencing.
(Requirement Met)
Requirement 3: Students must only provide patient care in an environment which is
safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with relevant legislation and
requirements regarding patient care, including equality and diversity, wherever
treatment takes place. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 4: When providing patient care and services, providers must ensure that
students are supervised appropriately according to the activity and the student’s stage
of development. (Requirement Met)
The panel was tasked with looking specifically at staffing levels and whether this has had any
impact on this Requirement.
Students are supervised appropriately according to their activity and skills. It was evident from
reviewing the documentation and speaking to both the students and staff that there was
appropriate supervision throughout the programme and that all staff were aware of their roles
and responsibilities.
Since moving to the new premises, additional clinical staff have been recruited to ensure there
is always an appropriate blend of specialist and generalist staff on each clinic. The school
requires a minimum of 3 staff to 20 students on clinic. It was also evident that should there be
staffing shortfalls on clinic, there are enough staff available to rotate resources to ensure all
students are supervised appropriately. The panel observed evidence that the school requires
higher levels of supervision for students during outreach to ensure that they are appropriately
supervised during their placements.
Requirement 5: Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained. This should
include training in equality and diversity legislation relevant for the role. Clinical
supervisors must have appropriate general or specialist registration with a UK
regulatory body. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 6: Providers must ensure that students and all those involved in the
delivery of education and training are aware of their obligation to raise concerns if they
identify any risks to patient safety and the need for candour when things go wrong.
Providers should publish policies so that it is clear to all parties how concerns should
be raised and how these concerns will be acted upon. Providers must support those
who do raise concerns and provide assurance that staff and students will not be
penalised for doing so. (Requirement Met)

Requirement 7: Systems must be in place to identify and record issues that may affect
patient safety. Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be taken by
the provider and where necessary the relevant regulatory body should be notified.
(Requirement Met)
The panel was tasked with looking specifically at patient safety issues and the process for
logging, escalating and addressing the management of concerns.
Overall responsibility for patient safety lies with the Clinical Director of Birmingham Community
Healthcare Foundation Trust (BCHCFT). The School collaborates closely with the BCHCFT to
manage the delivery of dental care for patients by students. Management structures, lines of
responsibility and processes exist within each establishment to achieve this. The panel
observed evidence of close working partnerships and representation at every level of key staff
from both bodies on appropriate committees to ensure delivery of safe patient care.
The use of CAFS for recording student progression also allows any patient safety issues to be
recorded and patterns of behaviour flagged. Safety issues are reported through the joint Health
and Safety Committee up to the College Health and Safety Committee and also through the
Trust Divisional Management Board.
The panel saw a clearly evidenced process for recording, managing and addressing patient
safety concerns, as well as completed logs for incident reports. It was evident that all clinical
and professional concerns relating to patient care were being managed appropriately. It was
clear that when any incident occurred, a ‘lessons learnt report’ was written and disseminated to
both students and staff and processes were changed in order to prevent the same issue of
concern arising again.
To further reinforce and develop their approach, the panel would encourage the school to
consider the inclusion of Patient Safety within the area of Professionalism in their related
assessment marking sheets.
Requirement 8: Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and apply as
required. The content and significance of the student fitness to practise procedures
must be conveyed to students and aligned to GDC Student Fitness to Practise
Guidance. Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar with the
GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance. Providers must also ensure that the GDC’s
Standard for the Dental Team are embedded within student training. (Requirement Met)

Standard 2 – Quality evaluation and review of the programme
The provider must have in place effective policy and procedures for the monitoring and
review of the programme.
Requirement 9: The provider must have a framework in place that details how it
manages the quality of the programme which includes making appropriate changes to
ensure the curriculum continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and adapts
to changing legislation and external guidance. There must be a clear statement about
where responsibility lies for this function. (Requirement Met)
The School has a number of committees managing the quality assurance of the programme,
starting with the School of Dentistry Curriculum Development Committee that feeds into the
Quality Management Committee, College Quality Assurance and Approval Committee,
University Quality Assurance Committee and the University Education Committee.

The panel observed clear and effective evidence of changes which had been introduced to the
quality management framework since the previous inspection, with a new lead appointed to
drive focus and provide oversight on all related quality assurance matters. It was also evident
that the programme has now introduced an integrated approach into the University quality
structure, thus providing a more collaborative and supportive approach within the wider
University quality management structure.
The panel also saw evidence of how changes were made to the programme resulting from
student feedback and how that process was communicated through all of the committee
structures, resulting in practical and effective change.
The panel were satisfied with the quality framework functions and where responsibility for
these functions specifically lie.
Requirement 10: Any concerns identified through the Quality Management framework,
including internal and external reports relating to quality, must be addressed as soon
as possible and the GDC notified of serious threats to students achieving the learning
outcomes. The provider will have systems in place to quality assure placements.
(Requirement Met)
Requirement 11: Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external quality
assurance procedures. External quality assurance should include the use of external
examiners, who should be familiar with the GDC learning outcomes and their context
and QAA guidelines should be followed where applicable. Patient and/or customer
feedback must be collected and used to inform programme development. (Requirement
Met)
The panel was tasked with looking specifically at how student feedback was used to inform the
development of the programme.
The programme uses a variety of methods to collect and use student and patient feedback in
programme development. Patient feedback is collected for each student after almost every
clinical interaction. The leadership and staff team have actively encouraged a culture of
personal reflection and responsibility through this process.
Student feedback is actively collected across a range of methods. It is collected through the
staff student committee, mid-module feedback, end of module/specialty questionnaire, student
focus groups and University wide surveys. Feedback is collated by the Quality Office and
distributed to module/specialty leads where it is then discussed with teaching staff within the
specialty area and an action plan is developed to respond to issues raised by students. This
action plan is incorporated into the annual module/specialty review process, which is submitted
to the Head of Education and is summarised in the School Education Plan. Modules/specialty
areas review these actions to ensure successful completion and report on this at the
subsequent annual evaluation. At the end of each academic year, each module and specialty
lead provides a response on the key themes from the years’ student feedback. These
responses are collated by the College Quality Office and sent to the next student cohort to
illustrate how student feedback has been used to enhance educational provision and
programme development.
The Staff Student Committee is co-chaired by a student and supported by a senior member of
staff. This committee has wide representation from teaching as well as nursing staff and
student representatives from each year of the programme. At each meeting, any concerns are
documented and acted upon as soon as possible. Progress with actions is discussed at the
subsequent meeting. Changes have been made to the Staff Student Committee to ensure that
it responds rapidly to student concerns. Prior to the meeting, a document is circulated to

students, and any actions required are delivered wherever possible prior to the meeting and
reported on at the next meeting.
The College has proactively created a patient public network, recruiting around 15-20 public
contributors across all healthcare programmes, specifically to work with the school on
education matters and programme development.
The panel were satisfied that feedback was being utilised in programme development.
Requirement 12: The provider must have effective systems in place to quality assure
placements where students deliver treatment to ensure that patient care and student
assessment across all locations meets these Standards. The quality assurance systems
should include the regular collection of student and patient feedback relating to
placements. (Requirement Met)

Standard 3– Student assessment
Assessment must be reliable and valid. The choice of assessment method must be
appropriate to demonstrate achievement of the GDC learning outcomes. Assessors
must be fit to perform the assessment task.
Requirement 13: To award the qualification, providers must be assured that students
have demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes, and that they
are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner. Evidence must be provided that
demonstrates this assurance, which should be supported by a coherent approach to the
principles of assessment referred to in these standards. (Requirement Met)
The panel was tasked with looking specifically at the process of sign-up for final examinations
and access to a range and number of patients.
The School retained minimum quantitative requirements for a student to be entered into the
final BDS examination alongside a competency-based approach. At checkpoints throughout
the clinical course (end of year progress boards in third and fourth year), students’ attainment
against targets is monitored. Through written and verbal feedback, students are provided with
encouragement and support to keep them on course to meet the minimum quantitative
requirements set by the School for entry to finals. Additionally, CAFS allows students to see in
real time their individual progress and to benchmark such against their peers.
The BDS programme has a continuous assessment ethos, whereby students develop along a
skills escalator, and assessment and feedback is underpinned by the CAFS system and by
termly reports that are reported via progress board meetings.
Prior to finals, four meetings take place between January and April to discuss the progress of
the students and sign off those who have met the minimum quantitative and qualitative
requirements. The external examiner attends the final meeting to review and quality check the
decisions made.
The panel were satisfied that the sign-up process for finals was robust enough to determine
whether a student had demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes.
Requirement 14: The provider must have in place management systems to plan, monitor
and centrally record the assessment of students, including the monitoring of clinical
and/or technical experience, throughout the programme against each of the learning
outcomes. (Requirement Met)

The panel was tasked with looking specifically at how student progression is monitored and
managed.
Academic progress is managed through a central student assessment recording and
monitoring system called “BIRMS”, alongside progression to subsequent academic years.
Clinical experience and performance is managed and monitored via CAFS, a system
developed for monitoring clinical, professional and technical experience as well as
performance.
Robust and effective monitoring mechanisms are present as part of the monitoring progression
and requirements through the years. Students are encouraged to maintain a practice of
patients as part of their ongoing treatment planning and delivery; however, from time to time it
is necessary to alternate patients across students to assist those students in achieving all the
skills required. Additionally, the Heads of the Restorative Phase of Clinical Practice (years 3 &
4) and Heads of GDP-phase (final year) facilitate allocation of patients from specialist staff to
ensure that all students have an appropriate case mix.
CAFS can be used to provide feedback to students and staff (on students and themselves).
Clinical experience is assessed annually in relation to the progression requirements for that
year of study.
All clinical staff are able to report concerns about student progression on an individual basis
using a form system. In addition, the Head of Speciality will also monitor progress. Patterns of
minor concerns can be highlighted and verified using CAFS. Throughout the programme,
formative and summative progress boards are held where students’ attainment against set
targets is monitored. Heads of Firm within Clinical Practice as well as Heads of Specialty areas
attend these boards and report on their area. Following the progress board, written and verbal
feedback is provided to students to encourage and support them in remaining on-course to meet
the minimum quantitative requirements set by the school for entry to finals. If students require
support for particular items, the Heads of Firm can facilitate the bespoke management of
appointment books and direct a student to suitable patients. Additionally, in the fourth year there
is the option not to undertake an elective project thereby allowing students to remain on clinic
for an additional four weeks. Students may be advised that completing these four weeks would
be beneficial in improving clinical experience.
The panel saw evidence of a clear and effective audit trail that allowed full oversight of student
progression throughout the course. They also saw evidence of progress meetings with Heads of
Firm on a termly basis. In instances where struggling students were picked up, monitoring and
clear and timely action plans were introduced for remediation which the panel considered to be
appropriate. There was clear evidence that assessment focus was continuous.
Requirement 15: Students must have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and should undertake each activity relating to patient care on
sufficient occasions to enable them to develop the skills and the level of competency to
achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes. (Requirement Met)
The panel was tasked with looking specifically at access to a range and breadth of patients.
The programme ensures that all students are exposed to a breadth of patients and procedures,
which are repeated throughout the clinical programme. To ensure this occurs, students must
attain minimal requirements in order to be signed up for the final BDS examination. Students
are obtaining a range of experience in a number of different settings both at the dental hospital
and during outreach, providing a sufficient breadth of experience.

At the previous inspection, there had been concerns raised specifically relating to paediatric
experience and whether the move to the new site would impact patient supply. The associates
noted that a new paediatric dentistry lead was in place and has subsequently developed a
number of innovative pathways to paediatric patient supply. While the current cohort was
achieving higher numbers than the minimum requirements, the panel felt that the minimum
requirement target should be raised in order to ensure that students continue to obtain the
appropriate skills in paediatric dentistry.
The School has developed The Dental Foundation Training Passport to provide Foundation
Trainers with a clinical transcript of a students’ activity during the course. A report is generated
from CAFS and is divided into two parts: a front page with key items listed, including
certification of completion of Intermediate Life Support as well as Level 2 Adult and Child
safeguarding, and a second part with the full data set from CAFS breaking down the
procedures completed into their components. The first part has information relevant to the
foundation trainer and their practice. The reverse page contains additional information that is
useful when submitting data to NHS England in their Performer List application process. The
panel viewed this training passport as a resource that should be commended, as it provided an
excellent overview for both the student and foundation trainers of the clinical experience the
student has achieved.
Requirement 16: Providers must demonstrate that assessments are fit for purpose and
deliver results which are valid and reliable. The methods of assessment used must be
appropriate to the learning outcomes, in line with current and best practice and be
routinely monitored, quality assured and developed. (Requirement Met)
The panel was tasked with looking at the assessments students undertake and the standard
setting process for these assessments.
Since the last inspection, the programme has developed a blueprint that maps teaching and
assessment to the GDC learning outcomes. The School uses a wide variety of assessment
methods, including formal examinations, OSCEs, Structured Oral Tests and group
presentations. It the responsibility of the module or specialty lead to set the examinations and
assessments.
Clinical performance is assessed for every session using CAFS, using an A to E grading scale,
that reflects a composite of the knowledge grade and technical grade to give an overall session
grade.
All assessments now consider a standard setting method, against which the assessments are
marked and/or graded. The method used is identified in the assessment blueprint. Module and
specialty/subject leads select the most appropriate method of standard setting for assessments
within their areas.
The panel were satisfied that the assessments being undertaken were appropriate to the
learning outcomes and that students were fully aware of the marking criteria and assessments
they would undertake.
Requirement 17: Assessment must utilise feedback collected from a variety of sources,
which should include other members of the dental team, peers, patients and/or
customers. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 18: The provider must support students to improve their performance by
providing regular feedback and by encouraging students to reflect on their practice.
(Requirement Met)

Requirement 19: Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills, experience and
training to undertake the task of assessment, including appropriate general or specialist
registration with a UK regulatory body. Examiners/ assessors should have received
training in equality and diversity relevant for their role. (Requirement Met)
Under this Requirement, the panel was tasked with looking specifically at staffing levels and
how this may impact upon the examinations and assessments.
All staff involved in the assessment process are appropriately qualified and trained, with those
who do not have post graduate qualifications being encouraged and supported to do so within
the first two years of their employment. All new staff are provided with an induction folder
containing relevant information. Included in this are details of the curriculum and where
teaching occurs. As part of the induction, staff shadow an experienced member of staff for two
weeks. They are introduced to the E-Dental Record, CAFS and the virtual learning
environment called “CANVAS” and also complete Trust and University induction forms and
processes. Grading guidelines are provided, however, through the use of CAFS, senior
administrators can access calibration data to assess consistency of staff grading. This is
monitored and discussed with individual staff at an annual performance development review.
The panel would also encourage the introduction of a more formal PDR structure at the early
stage of appointment so as to support staff and engage in the identification of training needs
relevant to the area of assessment.
The panel viewed evidence whereby staff had undertaken equality and diversity training and
were advised it is further planned to introduce Unconscious Bias training to assist and develop
staff in their assessment role. The panel viewed this development positively and would like to
encourage the School to ensure this training occurs on a similar cyclical basis.
The leadership team displayed a progressive approach to staff development in the area of
assessment.
The panel did not see evidence to suggest that current staffing provision was having a
negative impact on the assessment process. The process appeared well resourced. However,
there was commentary from a small number of students that feedback and second attempt
support mechanisms were not as effective as support previously received during the clinical
phase. The panel advise that this should be an area of development for the programme in the
future.
Requirement 20: Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent to which
assessment processes are rigorous, set at the correct standard, ensure equity of
treatment for students and have been fairly conducted. The responsibilities of the
external examiners must be clearly documented. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 21: Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear criteria. The
standard expected of students in each area to be assessed must be clear and students
and staff involved in assessment must be aware of this standard. An appropriate
standard setting process must be employed for summative assessments. (Requirement
Met)
Assessments are performed against clear criteria and appeared fair. Students are made aware
of the marking schemes and their standard setting protocols for each examination.
Prior to each assessment, examination questions and responses are quality assured initially
with academics within the related module, subject and specialty area. Post-assessment,
responses are analysed for consistent outliers and a decision made, usually with the external
examiner, whether to modify or omit the question if appropriate. This is usually discussed with
the Assessment lead and reported at the relevant examination board

The panel saw evidence of clear grading criteria for all assessments and examinations. It was
clear to the panel, that the students and staff involved were all aware and informed with regard
to the grading criteria, where to find details about these, and the type of assessments which
would be undertaken.

Summary of Action
Req. number
7

Action
To further reinforce and develop their
approach, the panel would encourage
the school to consider the inclusion of
Patient Safety within the area of
Professionalism in their related
assessment marking sheets.

Observations & response from Provider
We welcome this recommendation. Critical domains in
student performance such as Infection Control or
Communication are recorded in CAFS in a binary
manner as “OK” or “Not OK” (see below), whereas
technical grades are recorded using a competency
system.

Student level reports are produced that highlight recent
unsatisfactory sessions as an early warning to the
school, based on these existing OK/Not OK grades as
well as other clinical grades. The recent addition of the
cause for concern button allows staff to quickly raise
serious concerns, including patient safety to senior
members of school staff.
Adding patient safety to this binary system will be
implemented via re‐programming. We will work with
INVENT Partners to develop CAFS to enable report
generation at the student level on “safety”.

Due date
Annual Monitoring
2020

15

While the current cohort was achieving
higher numbers than the
minimum requirements, the panel felt
that the minimum requirement target
should be raised in order to ensure that
students continue to obtain the
appropriate skills in paediatric dentistry.

Following discussions with the academic lead in
Paediatric Dentistry, it is clear that the CAFS report
data presented during the inspection did not reflect the
holistic student experience of Paediatric Dentistry. The
most critical skill to ensure preparedness for practice is
the ability of the new graduate to manage the child’s
behaviour and wellbeing, as well as parental factors, to
ensure safe and successful delivery of the most
appropriate care. Each student manages a minimum of
15 child treatment episodes, within which interventions
may be behavioural or surgical. We will ensure these
are all reported via CAFS and we will review the
surgical intervention minimum criteria further. This may
require further programming of CAFS via INVENT.

Annual Monitoring
2020

15

The panel would also encourage the
introduction of a more formal PDR
structure at the early stage of
appointment so as to support staff and
engage in the identification of training
needs relevant to the area of
assessment.

December 2019

19

There was commentary from a small
number of students that feedback and
second attempt support mechanisms

We appreciate the intention of this suggestion but
interpret it to mean more of a “Training Needs
Assessment” than a PDR, as a PDR requires the part‐
time staff member to have worked for a period of time
to enable meaningful review. We welcome the
suggestion of a TNA and this will be developed
alongside the existing induction material as part of a
required but self‐directed online assessment. Training
needs will be identified, and staff signposted as
appropriate to specialty teaching areas or other
academic resources, prior to further review at the
annual PDR. Grading standardisation has been
recently further developed through CAFS to allow all
staff to see their own grading profile against an
anonymised data set, this will allow early selfintervention without the need to wait for
feedback at an annual appraisal.
We recognise this and will implement the following:
1. Inclusion via the resilience training programme this
academic year, a session on how to cope with

July 2020

were not as effective as support
previously received during the clinical
phase.

unsatisfactory grades/ not being top of the class. 2. We
will improve signposting for students to engage with the
academic support services, available at the university.
3.
We will undertake educational sessions with our
staff to understand the needs and changes to how this
generation of students respond to constructive criticism,
especially in year 3, and to explain the basic
psychology of “constructive” criticism and the need to
balance this with praise when deserved.
We will ensure specialty/subject leads meet with each
student who fails an exam and supports them towards
the second attempt.

Observations from the provider on content of report
The provider was satisfied with the content of the report and made no further comments.

Recommendations to the GDC
Education associates’ recommendation
Date of next regular monitoring exercise

Qualification continues to be sufficient for holders to apply for registration as a
dentist with the General Dental Council
Academic year 2020/21

Annex 1
Inspection purpose and process

1. As part of its duty to protect patients and promote high standards within the professions it regulates, the General Dental Council (GDC)
quality assures the education and training of student dentists and dental care professionals (DCPs) at institutions whose qualifications enable
the holder to apply for registration with the GDC. It also quality assures new qualifications where it is intended that the qualification will lead to
registration. The aim of this quality assurance activity is to ensure that institutions produce a new registrant who has demonstrated, on
graduation, that they have met the learning outcomes required for registration with the GDC. This ensures that students who obtain a
qualification leading to registration are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner.
2. Inspections are a key element of the GDC’s quality assurance activity. They enable a recommendation to be made to the Council of the GDC
regarding the ‘sufficiency’ of the programme for registration as a dentist and ‘approval’ of the programme for registration as a dental care
professional. The GDC’s powers are derived under Part II, Section 9 of the Dentists Act 1984 (as amended).
3. The GDC document ‘Standards for Education’ 2nd edition1 is the framework used to evaluate qualifications. There are 21 Requirements in
three distinct Standards, against which each qualification is assessed.
4. The education provider is requested to undertake a self-evaluation of the programme against the individual Requirements under the
Standards for Education. This involves stating whether each Requirement is ‘met’, ‘partly met’ or ‘not met’ and to provide evidence in support of
their evaluation. The inspection panel examines this evidence, may request further documentary evidence and gathers further evidence from
discussions with staff and students. The panel will reach a decision on each Requirement, using the following descriptors:
A Requirement is met if:
“There is sufficient appropriate evidence derived from the inspection process. This evidence provides the inspectors with broad confidence that
the provider demonstrates the Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students is supportive of documentary
evidence and the evidence is robust, consistent and not contradictory. There may be minor deficiencies in the evidence supplied but these are
likely to be inconsequential.”
A Requirement is partly met if:
“Evidence derived from the inspection process is either incomplete or lacks detail and, as such, fails to convince the inspection panel that the
provider fully demonstrates the Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students may not fully support the evidence

submitted or there may be contradictory information in the evidence provided. There is, however, some evidence of compliance and it is likely
that either (a) the appropriate evidence can be supplied in a short time frame, or, (b) any deficiencies identified can be addressed and
evidenced in the annual monitoring process.”
A Requirement is not met if:
“The provider cannot provide evidence to demonstrate a Requirement or the evidence provided is not convincing. The information gathered at
the inspection through meetings with staff and students does not support the evidence provided or the evidence is inconsistent and/or
incompatible with other findings. The deficiencies identified are such as to give rise to serious concern and will require an immediate action plan
from the provider. The consequences of not meeting a Requirement in terms of the overall sufficiency of a programme will depend upon the
compliance of the provider across the range of Requirements and the possible implications for public protection”
5. Inspection reports highlight areas of strength and draw attention to areas requiring improvement and development, including actions that are
required to be undertaken by the provider. Where an action is needed for a Requirement to be met, the term ‘must’ is used to describe the
obligation on the provider to undertake this action. For these actions the inspectors may stipulate a specific timescale by which the action must
be completed or when an update on progress must be provided. In their observations on the content of the report, the provider should confirm
the anticipated date by which these actions will be completed. Where an action would improve how a Requirement is met, the term ‘should’ is
used and for these actions there will be no due date stipulated. Providers will be asked to report on the progress in addressing the required
actions through the annual monitoring process. Serious concerns about a lack of progress may result in further inspections or other quality
assurance activity.
6. The QA team aims to send an initial draft of the inspection report to the provider within two months of the conclusion of the inspection. The
provider of the qualification has the opportunity to provide factual corrections on the draft report. Following the production of the final report the
provider is asked to submit observations on, or objections to, the report and the actions listed. Where the inspection panel have recommended
that the programme is sufficient for registration, the Council of the GDC have delegated responsibility to the GDC Registrar to consider the
recommendations of the panel. Should an inspection panel not be able to recommend ‘sufficiency’ or ‘approval’, the report and observations
would be presented to the Council of the GDC for consideration.
7. The final version of the report and the provider’s observations are published on the GDC website.

