Education Quality Assurance Inspection Report
Education
Provider/Awarding
Body
University of
Manchester

Outcome of Inspection

Programme/Award

Inspection Dates

Bachelor of Dental
Surgery (BDS)

13-14 February 2019
31 May 2019 (Exam
Board)

Recommended that the Bachelor of
Dental Surgery (BDS) continues to be
approved to register as a dentist.

*Full details of the inspection process can be found in the annex*
Inspection summary
Remit and purpose of inspection:

Inspection referencing the Standards for
Education to determine approval of the
award for the purpose of registration with
the GDC as a dentist.

Learning Outcomes:

Risk based: Focused on Requirements 4, 5,
6, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 18 and 19
Preparing for Practice (dentist)

Programme inspection date(s):

13-14 February 2019

Examination inspection date(s):

31 May 2019 (exam board only)

Inspection panel:

Carl Stychin (Chair and Non-registrant
Member)
Fiona Sandom (DCP Member)
Timothy O’Brien (Dentist Member)
Richard Cure (Dentist Member)

GDC Staff:

James Marshall
Jackie Spencer (exam board)

The inspection undertaken at the University of Manchester was risk-based, focusing on
specific areas of their Bachelor of Dental Surgery (BDS) programme. The GDC quality
assurance team and a panel of experienced education associates undertook an independent
evaluation of information available to determine the content of each inspection. The
information considered included annual monitoring returns, previous inspection reports
(including progress against actions), responses to wider recommendations in the GDC
Annual Review of Education, Fitness to Practise data and complaints received.
Following this assessment, it was decided that the inspection panel focus on Requirements
4, 5, 6, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 18 and 19.
The BDS programmed delivered by the University of Manchester has undergone a number
of changes since the last GDC inspection, including both a faculty and university restructure,
which has resulted in a strain on staff resources. The panel was pleased to note a
commitment from the new Head of Division to ensure staffing issues remain a priority, with a
focus on recruitment.
The Division has also recently moved away from using the LIFTUPP clinical recording
system and is now using iDentity. The GDC will continue to monitor the use of iDentity
through the regular Monitoring exercise, to ensure it remains a fit for purpose system. The
panel agreed the move towards the Milestone attainment system was innovative and will
also continue to monitor its performance.

Students were very positive about the experience they gained at their outreach placements
and the panel encourages the programme team to continue to utilise and support the
experienced teams within the outreach centres.

Background and overview of Qualification
Annual intake
Programme duration
Format of programme

75-80 students
173 weeks over 5 years
Year 1: Basic sciences, EBL, Weekly
symposia, small group teaching, simulated
clinical experience, clinical experience
towards the end of the academic year
Year 2: Basic sciences, EBL, Weekly
symposia, small group teaching, learning
on dental public health, simulated clinical
experience, direct patient contact
Year 3: Basic sciences, EBL, Weekly
symposia, small group teaching, Teaching
on law, ethics, and professionalism,
simulated clinical experience, direct patient
contact
Year 4: EBL, Weekly symposia, small group
teaching, Teaching on critical appraisal and
research methods, direct patient contact,
outreach programme, medicine and surgery
programme
Year 5: EBL, Weekly symposia, small group
teaching, Teaching on clinical governance,
direct patient contact, sedation training

Number of providers delivering the
programme

1

The panel wishes to thank the staff, students, and external stakeholders involved with the
BDS programme for their co-operation and assistance with the inspection.

Outcome of relevant Requirements 1
Standard One
1

Met

2

Met

3

Met

4

Partly met

5

Met

6

Met

7

Met

8

Met
Standard Two

9

Met

10

Met

11

Partly Met

12

Met
Standard Three

13

Met

14

Partly met

15

Met

16

Met

17

Met

18

Met

19

Partly Met

20

Met

21

Met

All Requirements within the Standards for Education are applicable for all programmes. Specific
Requirements will be examined through inspection activity through identification via risk analysis processes or
due to current thematic reviews.

1

Standard 1 – Protecting patients
Providers must be aware of their duty to protect the public. Providers must ensure that
patient safety is paramount and care of patients is of an appropriate standard. Any risk
to the safety of patients and their care by students must be minimised.
Requirement 1: Students must provide patient care only when they have demonstrated
adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical procedures, the student should be
assessed as competent in the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients. (Requirement Met)

Requirement 2: Providers must have systems in place to inform patients that they may
be treated by students and the possible implications of this. Patient agreement to
treatment by a student must be obtained and recorded prior to treatment commencing.
(Requirement Met)

Requirement 3: Students must only provide patient care in an environment which is
safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with relevant legislation and
requirements regarding patient care, including equality and diversity, wherever
treatment takes place. (Requirement Met)

Requirement 4: When providing patient care and services, providers must ensure that
students are supervised appropriately according to the activity and the student’s stage
of development. (Requirement Partly met)
During the inspection the panel noted issues had arisen regarding staffing levels in the
Division. The inspectors were informed that a number of factors had contributed to heightened
staffing pressures, which included a recent university restructure, resulting in a number of
redundancies, and the use of GDPs within the teaching environment. As a result of these
issues, on occasion teaching clinics were cancelled. While this action is not desirable for the
students’ learning experience, the inspectors agreed this was an appropriate approach to take
in order to ensure patient safety was maintained. The panel noted that for future teaching
years, the University should review staffing levels within the Division on a regular basis to
ensure clinics are able to run as scheduled and not to the detriment of the students, whilst still
maintaining patient safety.
As noted above, the programme utilises GDP teaching support on the clinics, which the
inspectors agreed was a positive approach and provided students with the opportunity to work
with dental professionals from a wide range of clinical backgrounds. Inspectors agreed that the
programme team must ensure standardisation, calibration and appropriate use of university
documentation are utilised to guarantee they are all assessing to the same standard. The
panel also agreed that regular training opportunities must be provided to the GDP teaching
team to mitigate the risk resulting from a high turnover of these staff members.
Despite concerns raised above, the inspectors were provided with satisfactory evidence of the
supervision levels for students while undertaking clinical activity both in the dental hospital and
in outreach settings. Within the dental hospital, students always work in pairs with one acting
as operator and one assisting. On hospital clinics there is a ratio of one member of staff to
every six students. The inspectors noted a high level of experienced nursing support for
students on the BDS programme, this was especially evident within the outreach environment,
where students have a dedicated nurse to support them.

Requirement 5: Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained. This should
include training in equality and diversity legislation relevant for the role. Clinical
supervisors must have appropriate general or specialist registration with a UK
regulatory body. (Requirement Met)
The inspectors were generally satisfied with the methods used by the Division in order to
ensure all staff members were appropriately trained and qualified. All clinical tutors are
required to have GDC registration and tutors outwith the Division (e.g. Trust employees) are
required to evidence their registration by providing a hard copy of their GDC certificate to their
employer on an annual basis.
In order for staff members to have the greatest opportunity to attend training and development
sessions, the Division organises lunchtime meetings across the week in order to allow part
time staff to attend. These lunchtime training opportunities are repeated on a two to three
monthly basis.
In addition to this, the dental hospital runs MegaWeek consultant clinics on a twice yearly
basis. During the MegaWeek, the majority of the routine teaching on the restorative clinic is
cancelled and the students participate on consultation clinics instead. Consultants in
restorative dentistry are assisted by postgraduate students who are capable of supervising
students in these sessions, with little need for the part time clinical tutors to assist. As a result
of this, the Division schedules its away day during the MegaWeek so that the majority of the
teaching staff are able to attend. The Division also produces a monthly newsletter for staff,
which includes details on items discussed at the away days.
The University provides online training on Equality and Diversity, which is mandatory for all
staff members to undertake. The inspectors were satisfied with the evidence provided that all
members of staff were completing this.

Requirement 6: Providers must ensure that students and all those involved in the
delivery of education and training are aware of their obligation to raise concerns if they
identify any risks to patient safety and the need for candour when things go wrong.
Providers should publish policies so that it is clear to all parties how concerns should
be raised and how these concerns will be acted upon. Providers must support those
who do raise concerns and provide assurance that staff and students will not be
penalised for doing so. (Requirement Met)
The inspectors were informed that all teaching staff involved with the delivery of the BDS
programme are required to have an honorary contract with Manchester University Foundation
Trust. A requirement of this contract is for all holders to complete online mandatory training on
an annual basis, which includes training on raising concerns. The panel was also provided with
copies of the Trust Raising Concerns and Duty of Candour policies. Further to this, the Trust
cancels all teaching and clinical activities four times a year so all members of staff can attend
clinical governance meetings.
Students on the BDS programme are initially introduced to the concept of raising concerns
during their initial induction, this training is then repeated at the beginning of each new
academic year. When students undertake their outreach sessions, they are required to treat
vulnerable patients and receive safeguarding training during their induction to this aspect of the
course.

Requirement 7: Systems must be in place to identify and record issues that may affect
patient safety. Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be taken by
the provider and where necessary the relevant regulatory body should be notified.
(Requirement Met)

Requirement 8: Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and apply as
required. The content and significance of the student fitness to practise procedures
must be conveyed to students and aligned to GDC Student Fitness to Practise
Guidance. Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar with the
GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance. Providers must also ensure that the GDC’s
Standard for the Dental Team are embedded within student training. (Requirement Met)

Standard 2 – Quality evaluation and review of the programme
The provider must have in place effective policy and procedures for the monitoring and
review of the programme.
Requirement 9: The provider must have a framework in place that details how it
manages the quality of the programme which includes making appropriate changes to
ensure the curriculum continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and adapts
to changing legislation and external guidance. There must be a clear statement about
where responsibility lies for this function. (Requirement Met)
Overall responsibility for quality management of the programme sits with the Undergraduate
Programme Committee (UPC), which provides the framework through which the Division
manages all changes to the programme. The UPC is chaired by the Director of Undergraduate
Education and has representatives from each of the years as well as the Senior Tutor and
Undergraduate Manager. In addition to this, student representatives attend the UPC.
Additional members of the committee include the Director for Evidence Based Dentistry, the
Director of Student Experience, the Chair of the eLearning Group and the Chair of the
Assessment and Examination Group. The inspectors were satisfied that through this group,
any changes to the curriculum would be appropriately and effectively managed.
The inspectors noted that the issue of a high turnover of GDPs involved with the programme
was discussed and managed via the UPC. While the inspectors agreed the high turnover of
GDP staff members was not ideal, they were satisfied there were suitable mechanisms in
place to ensure timely recruitment of new team members. The provider gave assurance that it
was prepared to take the decision to cancel clinics on the rare occasions where supervisions
levels were too low and patient safety risked being jeopardised.
Staff Student Liaison Committee meetings, chaired by Director of Student Experience, are
held monthly and the inspectors were provided with minutes of these meetings, which were
deemed an effective tool to escalate concerns from the student body. During the inspection
the panel met with representatives from each cohort of students, who were satisfied there
were appropriate and effective mechanisms to raise concerns and discuss aspects of the
programme that could benefit from improvement.

Requirement 10: Any concerns identified through the Quality Management framework,
including internal and external reports relating to quality, must be addressed as soon
as possible and the GDC notified of serious threats to students achieving the learning
outcomes. The provider will have systems in place to quality assure placements.
(Requirement Met)

Requirement 11: Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external quality
assurance procedures. External quality assurance should include the use of external
examiners, who should be familiar with the GDC learning outcomes and their context
and QAA guidelines should be followed where applicable. Patient and/or customer
feedback must be collected and used to inform programme development. (Requirement
Partly Met)
The panel noted that External Examiners were utilised for all five years of the BDS programme
and their feedback is shared and discussed during the Assessment and Examination Group
meetings. Action plans following these meetings are shared with the External Examiners to
ensure transparency. The inspectors were provided with copies of the External Examiners

reports, responses from the University and minutes from Assessment and Examination group
meetings.
In addition to quality assurance provided by the External Examiners, all programmes must
complete an Annual Monitoring report, which is submitted to the Faculty to monitor progress
against set actions and objectives. All programmes must also submit to the Faculty a riskbased framework that focuses on students’ experience throughout each academic year.
The inspectors noted that the Division does have various methods for collecting patient
feedback, including the Trust’s Friend and Family Test, iDentity students’ grading system, and
via paper feedback forms. However, the panel agreed that the Division must make a concerted
effort to use this information more effectively in order to inform programme development.

Requirement 12: The provider must have effective systems in place to quality assure
placements where students deliver treatment to ensure that patient care and student
assessment across all locations meets these Standards. The quality assurance systems
should include the regular collection of student and patient feedback relating to
placements. (Requirement Met)
As part of the BDS inspection, panel members had the opportunity to visit an outreach centre
where students treat vulnerable patients. The inspectors interviewed staff involved in the
teaching and supervision within the centre, who praised the effective and open communication
channels between the Division and outreach facility.
The inspectors were supportive of having a dedicated staff member who is responsible for the
coordination of all outreach activity, as this ensured calibration and continuity across the
various sites.
The inspectors noted there were regular Outreach Teachers Group meetings, where nonsensitive concerns raised by the students are discussed. The UPC also has outreach as a
recurrent item on its agenda. Any feedback received by the committee that identifies a need for
further development is discussed and feeds into a centre action plan. Students also have the
opportunity to provide feedback on their outreach experience via the Staff Student Liaison
Committee.
As noted in Requirement 11, patient feedback is collected as part of the Friends and Family
Trust system and fed back to the Division, where it is discussed at the Clinical Governance
meetings. Patients also have the opportunity to provide feedback on their experience via their
iDentity clinical assessment system, which is used in both the dental hospital and in outreach.

Standard 3– Student assessment
Assessment must be reliable and valid. The choice of assessment method must be
appropriate to demonstrate achievement of the GDC learning outcomes. Assessors
must be fit to perform the assessment task.
Requirement 13: To award the qualification, providers must be assured that students
have demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes, and that they
are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner. Evidence must be provided that
demonstrates this assurance, which should be supported by a coherent approach to the
principles of assessment referred to in these standards. (Requirement Met)
In advance of the inspection the panel was provided with the Division’s blueprinting document,
which demonstrated that all GDC learning outcomes were being taught and assessed through
the programme.
In order to be assured that students have completed the necessary elements in order to
progress within the course, a sign-up meeting is held in early spring. Attendance at the sign-up
meeting is comprised of the Director of Undergraduate Education, Assessment Lead,
Undergraduate Manager, Academic Year Lead for each BDS cohort, Senior Tutor, and senior
academic members of staff. The panel reviews the following information in order to decide
whether students are fit to progress or need remedial support:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Record of attendance
Professionalism cards
Record of Student Development Record (SDR) meetings
Record of clinical activity
Record of successful achievement in clinical skills exams/gateways
Record of successful achievement in coursework assessments
Record of successful achievement of clinical milestones against the timeline
Patient feedback
Incident reports
Record of completion of annual NHS IT Skills course
Record of completion of annual Trust core e-learning
Record of suitability of two presentation cases for the BDS year five students
Record of successful completion of Health and Safety modules

In the event that the committee has concerns regarding the progression of a student during the
sign-up meeting, the student will be required to attend a Student Development Review Panel
(SDRP) meeting. These meetings will review concerns raised by the committee and the
student will be given an action plan with set deadlines to achieve incomplete items. In cases
where the committee identifies that the progress of the student is significantly below what is
expected, the committee will refer the student to the Health and Conduct Committee (HCC),
whereby a potential outcome could be referral to the Fitness to Practice committee (FtP).
The inspectors were provided with examples of students who had not been signed-up following
the SDRP meetings and were assured that the Division had a robust process in place for
managing and supporting struggling students.

Requirement 14: The provider must have in place management systems to plan, monitor
and centrally record the assessment of students, including the monitoring of clinical
and/or technical experience, throughout the programme against each of the learning
outcomes. (Requirement Partly Met)

The Division uses a number of management systems in order to monitor and centrally record
the assessment of students, including CEDAR, iDentity and formerly LIFTUPP.
CEDAR is an online database that collects and stores data on students’ attendance as well as
professionalism cards. The inspectors agreed it was an area of good practice to allow any
member of staff to issue professionalism cards, both positive and negative, as this recognised
input from all members of the dental team.
LIFTUPP was previously used to record clinical data within the Division, however this ceased
to be used at the end of the 2016-17 academic year and was replaced with iDentity. The
inspectors were informed that this decision was made for two reasons. Firstly, LIFTUPP only
functions on iPads while iDentity is web-based and can be accessed via any platform.
Secondly, the staff team felt that iDentity was more user-friendly and efficient to use compared
to LIFTUPP.
iDentity is the current system used to collect data on students’ performance in all clinical
settings, including the clinical skills laboratories and within the outreach centres. The
inspectors were given access to the system in order to scrutinise its use and effectiveness.
The panel agreed that in general the system worked well, however they did note a small
number of examples of clinical work on the system that had been uploaded by students but
had not been marked by tutors in a timely fashion. Going forwards, the Division must review
the marking strategy for iDentity to ensure it is contemporaneous and that all staff members
are assessing work submitted within prescribed timeframes.

Requirement 15: Students must have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and should undertake each activity relating to patient care on
sufficient occasions to enable them to develop the skills and the level of competency to
achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes. (Requirement Met)
The Division has recently introduced a new Milestone system, which scrutinises a smaller
number of qualitative competency assessments. This system is used in collaboration with
iDentity, which is a source of quantitative data based on a student’s experience. The Milestone
system was introduced to ensure students complete key procedures to a competent level.
The students take part in regular Student Development Record (SDR) meetings with their
academic year leads. During each SDR meeting, performance data for the student is reviewed,
which includes the breadth of patients and clinical exposure. SDR meetings are held on a
three-monthly basis for students who are progressing well. Where concerns have been
highlighted students are given an action plan and the frequency of the review meetings is
increased to ensure students are monitored and supported appropriately.
In addition to the SDR meetings and Milestones, the Division produces regular reports of the
clinical activity of the students via iDentity. This enables the programme team to identify any
students who are not receiving enough clinical experience or a sufficient breadth of patients.
In the event that it is identified that a student requires additional support and experience the
student is provided with the opportunity to attend additional clinical sessions. Further to this,
the Division will identify other opportunities where similar clinical exposure can be gained. For
example, in the scenario of oral surgery, arrangements will be made for students to attend
extra general anaesthesia sessions to gain additional experience performing extractions.

Requirement 16: Providers must demonstrate that assessments are fit for purpose and
deliver results which are valid and reliable. The methods of assessment used must be
appropriate to the learning outcomes, in line with current and best practice and be
routinely monitored, quality assured and developed. (Requirement Met)

Requirement 17: Assessment must utilise feedback collected from a variety of sources,
which should include other members of the dental team, peers, patients and/or
customers. (Requirement Met)

Requirement 18: The provider must support students to improve their performance by
providing regular feedback and by encouraging students to reflect on their practice.
(Requirement Met)
The inspectors noted that reflection and feedback is embedded in the culture, documentation
and recording systems used within the Division. The panel was pleased to see that reflection
forms a key element of the iDentity system.
On completion of each clinical treatment, students are required to grade their performance and
write a reflective statement. If the tutor disagrees with the student’s grading of their
performance, they are able to amend this and feedback with any learning points.

Requirement 19: Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills, experience and
training to undertake the task of assessment, including appropriate general or specialist
registration with a UK regulatory body. Examiners/ assessors should have received
training in equality and diversity relevant for their role. (Requirement Partly Met)
All examiners are provided with training on annual basis, which includes the mandatory
requirement to complete online Equality and Diversity training.
Further to this OSCE examiners receive online training, which includes a video on the format of
the exam followed by three videos of a simulated OSCE station attempted by three acting
students at different levels of ability. The examiners complete the marking sheet, judge each
attempt and enter their score online. Software is used to provide the examiner with immediate
feedback on how all the previous examiners assessed the attempt. This software indicates
where they are placed in comparison to other examiners and prompts them to self-reflect on
their performance.
For the Structured Oral Exam, assessors receive face-to-face training, which is run by the
Assessment Lead. Attendance at this training is mandatory.
While the inspectors agreed there were a range of opportunities for examiners to receive
training, they noted some variation in the use of marking forms. Going forwards, the Division
must ensure all examiners are trained and calibrated in order to use the assessment
documentation appropriately.

Requirement 20: Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent to which
assessment processes are rigorous, set at the correct standard, ensure equity of
treatment for students and have been fairly conducted. The responsibilities of the
external examiners must be clearly documented. (Requirement Met)

Requirement 21: Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear criteria. The
standard expected of students in each area to be assessed must be clear and students
and staff involved in assessment must be aware of this standard. An appropriate
standard setting process must be employed for summative assessments. (Requirement
Met)

Summary of Action
Req.
number
4

Action

Observations & response from Provider

Due date

The University should review staffing levels
within the Division on a regular basis to
ensure clinics are able to run as scheduled
and not to the detriment of the students,
whilst still maintaining patient safety.

Staffing is reported to DLT on a monthly basis. Any
issues regarding replacement or proposals for new
posts are forwarded to the SLT.

Annual Monitoring
2020

4

The programme team must ensure
standardisation, calibration and appropriate
use of university documentation are utilised
to guarantee they are all assessing to the
same standard. The panel also agreed that
regular training opportunities must be
provided to the GDP teaching team to
mitigate the risk resulting from a high
turnover of these staff members.

11

The Division must make a concerted effort
to use this information more effectively in
order to inform programme development.
The Division must review the marking
strategy for iDentity to ensure it is
contemporaneous and all staff members are
assessing work submitted within prescribed
timeframes.
The Division must ensure all examiners are
trained and calibrated in order to use the
assessment documentation appropriately.

14

19

Oral Surgery department is currently having the highest
number of cancelled clinics. A full time lecturer post is
currently being advertised to address this issue.
At the start of the academic year 2019-20 we ran 10
induction sessions during the induction week for all the
staff involved in teaching undergraduate students. 10
sessions were planned to ensure we capture all the
staff who work during the week. We have arranged a
university away day on Wednesday 4 December 2019
with all teaching cancelled and eCPD available to
encourage staff from both Dental Hospital and
Outreach Centres to attend.
We ensure to continue holding our refresher lunchtime
meetings with our part time staff throughout the
academic year for the purpose recalibration and
addressing any queries.
We will ensure that this becomes a standing item on our
UPC reportable by our NHS Liaison member of staff.

Annual Monitoring
2020

Annual Monitoring
2020

This was covered in the inductions sessions held and
will be repeated on a regular basis on the recalibration
sessions.

Annual Monitoring
2020

The Division will continue its calibration strategies for
OSCE, SAP and structured oral exams. The variation
in markings was predominately linked to assessments

Annual Monitoring
2020

done on the clinical skills facilities. We ensure a small
pool of calibrated examiners in charge of marking work
submitted for the gateway exercises. We have also
made improvements on the marking sheet to address
some of the problems of the old paperwork.

Observations from the provider on content of report
The content of the report is factually correct and a true reflection of the BDS programme in Manchester. The Division would like to thank
the inspecting team for their constructive comments.

Recommendations to the GDC
Education associates’ recommendation
Date of next regular monitoring exercise

Qualification continues to be approved for holders to apply for
registration as a Dentist with the General Dental Council
2020

Annex 1

Inspection purpose and process

1. As part of its duty to protect patients and promote high standards within the professions it
regulates, the General Dental Council (GDC) quality assures the education and training of
student dentists and dental care professionals (DCPs) at institutions whose qualifications
enable the holder to apply for registration with the GDC. It also quality assures new
qualifications where it is intended that the qualification will lead to registration. The aim of
this quality assurance activity is to ensure that institutions produce a new registrant who has
demonstrated, on graduation, that they have met the learning outcomes required for
registration with the GDC. This ensures that students who obtain a qualification leading to
registration are fit to practise at the level of a safe beginner.
2. Inspections are a key element of the GDC’s quality assurance activity. They enable a
recommendation to be made to the Council of the GDC regarding the ‘sufficiency’ of the
programme for registration as a dentist and ‘approval’ of the programme for registration as a
dental care professional. The GDC’s powers are derived under Part II, Section 9 of the
Dentists Act 1984 (as amended).
3. The GDC document ‘Standards for Education’ 2nd edition1 is the framework used to
evaluate qualifications. There are 21 Requirements in three distinct Standards, against
which each qualification is assessed.
4. The education provider is requested to undertake a self-evaluation of the programme
against the individual Requirements under the Standards for Education. This involves stating
whether each Requirement is ‘met’, ‘partly met’ or ‘not met’ and to provide evidence in
support of their evaluation. The inspection panel examines this evidence, may request
further documentary evidence and gathers further evidence from discussions with staff and
students. The panel will reach a decision on each Requirement, using the following
descriptors:
A Requirement is met if:
“There is sufficient appropriate evidence derived from the inspection process. This evidence
provides the inspectors with broad confidence that the provider demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students is supportive of
documentary evidence and the evidence is robust, consistent and not contradictory. There
may be minor deficiencies in the evidence supplied but these are likely to be
inconsequential.”
A Requirement is partly met if:
“Evidence derived from the inspection process is either incomplete or lacks detail and, as
such, fails to convince the inspection panel that the provider fully demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students may not fully
support the evidence submitted or there may be contradictory information in the evidence
provided. There is, however, some evidence of compliance and it is likely that either (a) the
appropriate evidence can be supplied in a short time frame, or, (b) any deficiencies identified
can be addressed and evidenced in the annual monitoring process.”
A Requirement is not met if:

“The provider cannot provide evidence to demonstrate a Requirement or the evidence
provided is not convincing. The information gathered at the inspection through meetings with
staff and students does not support the evidence provided or the evidence is inconsistent
and/or incompatible with other findings. The deficiencies identified are such as to give rise to
serious concern and will require an immediate action plan from the provider. The
consequences of not meeting a Requirement in terms of the overall sufficiency of a
programme will depend upon the compliance of the provider across the range of
Requirements and the possible implications for public protection”
5. Inspection reports highlight areas of strength and draw attention to areas requiring
improvement and development, including actions that are required to be undertaken by the
provider. Where an action is needed for a Requirement to be met, the term ‘must’ is used to
describe the obligation on the provider to undertake this action. For these actions the
inspectors may stipulate a specific timescale by which the action must be completed or when
an update on progress must be provided. In their observations on the content of the report,
the provider should confirm the anticipated date by which these actions will be completed.
Where an action would improve how a Requirement is met, the term ‘should’ is used and for
these actions there will be no due date stipulated. Providers will be asked to report on the
progress in addressing the required actions through the annual monitoring process. Serious
concerns about a lack of progress may result in further inspections or other quality
assurance activity.
6. The QA team aims to send an initial draft of the inspection report to the provider within two
months of the conclusion of the inspection. The provider of the qualification has the
opportunity to provide factual corrections on the draft report. Following the production of the
final report the provider is asked to submit observations on, or objections to, the report and
the actions listed. Where the inspection panel have recommended that the programme is
sufficient for registration, the Council of the GDC have delegated responsibility to the GDC
Registrar to consider the recommendations of the panel. Should an inspection panel not be
able to recommend ‘sufficiency’ or ‘approval’, the report and observations would be
presented to the Council of the GDC for consideration.
7. The final version of the report and the provider’s observations are published on the GDC
website.

