Education Quality Assurance Inspection Report
Education
Provider/Awarding
Body
University of Central
Lancashire
Outcome of Inspection

Programme/Award

Inspection Dates

Bachelor of Dental
Surgery (BDS)

11 April 2019

Recommended that the Bachelor of
Dental Surgery (BDS) continues to be
approved to register as a dentist.

*Full details of the inspection process can be found in the annex*
Inspection summary
Remit and purpose of inspection:

Inspection referencing the Standards for
Education to determine approval of the
award for the purpose of registration with
the GDC as a dentist

Learning Outcomes:

Risk based: Focused on Requirements 4, 9,
11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17
Preparing for Practice (dentist)

Programme inspection date(s):

11 April 2019

Inspection panel:

Katie Carter (Chair and Non-registrant
Member)
Sheila Oliver (Dentist Member)
James Ashworth-Holland (Dentist Member)

GDC Staff:

James Marshall
Javeriah Mahmood

The inspection undertaken at the University of Central Lancashire (UCLan) was risk-based,
focusing on specific areas of their Bachelor of Dental Surgery (BDS) programme. The GDC
quality assurance team and a panel of experienced education associates undertook an
independent evaluation of information available to determine the content of each inspection.
The information considered included annual monitoring returns, previous inspection reports
(including progress against actions), responses to wider recommendations in the GDC
Annual Review of Education, Fitness to Practise data and complaints received.
Following this assessment, it was decided that the inspection panel focus on Requirements
4, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17.
The BDS programme delivered by UCLan has undergone a significant School management
restructure since the last GDC inspection. While the inspection team did not identify this as
having an immediate detrimental effect, the panel recommends that the University senior
management continues to review the effectiveness of this restructure to ensure it does not
affect the delivery of the programme.
During the programme students gain their clinical experience in both the Dental Education
Centre (DEC) and Enhanced Training Practice (ETP) settings. The inspection team agreed
that this was both a positive and innovative approach to dental education as it provided
students with ‘real life’ experience and the opportunity to treat patients holistically. The ETP
allow students to continue to develop as independent practitioners, whilst still being under
appropriate supervision of the programme team.

The inspectors noted the positive use of student progression monitoring systems at the
University, including Leopard, which is used to log clinical activity. Currently students log
their activity on paper and then on Leopard, the panel encourages the School to continue
working towards removing the paper element of the process in order to reduce the risk of
erroneous data entry. The GDC will continue to review this development within the
Monitoring exercise.

Background and overview of Qualification
Annual intake
Programme duration
Format of programme

29 students
4 years (43 weeks over 11 months/year)
Example:
1st BDS
2nd BDS

3rd BDS

4th BDS

Graduate entry APL
Basic medical sciences – anatomy, physiology,
biochemistry
Human systems in health
Professionalism, law and ethics
Intro to Dental Public Health
Dental sciences – anatomy, embryology,
materials
Dental pathology – caries, periodontology,
tooth wear, bacteriology, dental pain
Operative techniques – Phantom head,
(direct restorative, prosthetics, exodontia, nonsurgical periodontology, infection control)
Core knowledge – radiology, local anaesthesia
Theoretical introduction to paediatric dentistry
– Operative techniques Phantom head
Medicine for dentistry – Human systems with
pathology
Pharmacology
Non-dental facial pain
Dental Public Health
Critical analysis
Professionalism, law and ethics
Theoretical endodontics and techniques –
Phantom head
Introduction to clinical experience – Direct
patient contact
Clinical experience DEC – Adults and children Prevention, non-surgical periodontal treatment,
simple restorative treatment, extractions
Provision of complete and partial dentures
Simple endodontic treatments
Clinical photography
“Roadshows” – Periodontics, paedodontics,
photography – theory and practical
Public Health (school visit)
Oral diseases – diagnosis and management
Dental Public Health
Research
Professionalism, law and ethics
General anaesthetic theory prior to GA
extraction experience
Inhalation sedation techniques
Minor oral surgery
Adult and child safeguarding

Secondary care placement / experience –
Maxillo-facial surgery, orthodontics, special
care, GA
Theoretical crown and bridge restorations –
Phantom head
Clinical experience DEC continues –
Development of enhanced restorative skills and
techniques, including indirect restorations
5th BDS

Number of providers delivering
the programme

Integrated clinical care
Dental Public Health
Clinical Audit
Preparation for DF1 interviews – Tutorials,
formative interviews
Consolidation of clinical diagnosis and
treatment planning
Clinical experience continues at DEC–
Development of restorative skills and
techniques, including indirect restorations
Extended training practice – Experience similar
to general dental practice
Secondary care placement / experience –
Maxillo-facial surgery, orthodontics, special
care, GA
Professionalism, law and ethics related to
dental practise

13
Enhanced Training Practice
Genix Healthcare Blackpool
Genix Healthcare Morecambe
Bupa Healthcare Acrrington/Burnley
Bupa Healthcare Carlisle
Dental Education Centre
Lancashire Care NHS Foundation Trust
Blackpool Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust
Cumbria Partnership NHS Foundation Trust
Secondary Care Provider NHS Trust
East Lancashire Hospitals NHS Trust
Lancashire Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust
North Cumbria University Hospitals NHS Trust
University Hospitals of Morecambe Bay NHS Foundation Trust
Cumbria Partnership NHS Foundation Trust
Other
UCLan Dental Clinic

The panel wishes to thank the staff, students, and external stakeholders involved with the
BDS programme for their co-operation and assistance with the inspection.

Outcome of relevant Requirements 1
Standard One
1

Met

2

Met

3

Met

4

Met

5

Met

6

Met

7

Met

8

Met
Standard Two

9

Met

10

Met

11

Met

12

Met
Standard Three

13

Met

14

Met

15

Met

16

Met

17

Partly Met

18

Met

19

Met

20

Met

21

Met

All Requirements within the Standards for Education are applicable for all programmes. Specific
Requirements will be examined through inspection activity through identification via risk analysis processes or
due to current thematic reviews.

1

Standard 1 – Protecting patients
Providers must be aware of their duty to protect the public. Providers must ensure that
patient safety is paramount and care of patients is of an appropriate standard. Any risk
to the safety of patients and their care by students must be minimised.
Requirement 1: Students must provide patient care only when they have demonstrated
adequate knowledge and skills. For clinical procedures, the student should be
assessed as competent in the relevant skills at the levels required in the pre-clinical
environments prior to treating patients. (Requirement Met)

Requirement 2: Providers must have systems in place to inform patients that they may
be treated by students and the possible implications of this. Patient agreement to
treatment by a student must be obtained and recorded prior to treatment commencing.
(Requirement Met)

Requirement 3: Students must only provide patient care in an environment which is
safe and appropriate. The provider must comply with relevant legislation and
requirements regarding patient care, including equality and diversity, wherever
treatment takes place. (Requirement Met)

Requirement 4: When providing patient care and services, providers must ensure that
students are supervised appropriately according to the activity and the student’s stage
of development. (Requirement Met)
The panel were satisfied that staff to student ratios were appropriate and in line with the preinspection evidence provided. There are good levels of nursing support in both ETPs and
DECs, where the students nurse for each other with additional support available if needed.
This was evident in 2018-19 Audit Reports testing of samples against sign off for assisted
operating for Morecambe ETP and Accrington DEC.
The University holds Clinical Supervisor training day once a year where Clinical Calibration is
revisited. The School is pursuing in making this a possibly as a bi-annual event. In addition to
this, ad hoc training events are also run by the individual DECs.
Students noted good relationships with staff members fostering a good atmosphere for
learning. Students have regular personal tutor sessions which they were positive about and
students were aware of where to find solutions to any problems. Students also have access to
the Supporting Clinically Challenged Students policy.
The Structured Event Reporting From (SERF) and the University Starfish systems are used to
monitor and record students’ issues and can log the support provided through academic
adviser meetings. Some Senior Clinical Teachers also have roles as year leads, which helps
to improve the communication links between DECs and UCLan. All staff members are trained
as academic advisors, training which is provided by the University.
Requirement 5: Supervisors must be appropriately qualified and trained. This should
include training in equality and diversity legislation relevant for the role. Clinical
supervisors must have appropriate general or specialist registration with a UK
regulatory body. (Requirement Met)

Requirement 6: Providers must ensure that students and all those involved in the
delivery of education and training are aware of their obligation to raise concerns if they
identify any risks to patient safety and the need for candour when things go wrong.
Providers should publish policies so that it is clear to all parties how concerns should
be raised and how these concerns will be acted upon. Providers must support those
who do raise concerns and provide assurance that staff and students will not be
penalised for doing so. (Requirement Met)

Requirement 7: Systems must be in place to identify and record issues that may affect
patient safety. Should a patient safety issue arise, appropriate action must be taken by
the provider and where necessary the relevant regulatory body should be notified.
(Requirement Met)

Requirement 8: Providers must have a student fitness to practise policy and apply as
required. The content and significance of the student fitness to practise procedures
must be conveyed to students and aligned to GDC Student Fitness to Practise
Guidance. Staff involved in the delivery of the programme should be familiar with the
GDC Student Fitness to Practise Guidance. Providers must also ensure that the GDC’s
Standard for the Dental Team are embedded within student training. (Requirement Met)

Standard 2 – Quality evaluation and review of the programme
The provider must have in place effective policy and procedures for the monitoring and
review of the programme.
Requirement 9: The provider must have a framework in place that details how it
manages the quality of the programme which includes making appropriate changes to
ensure the curriculum continues to map across to the latest GDC outcomes and adapts
to changing legislation and external guidance. There must be a clear statement about
where responsibility lies for this function. (Requirement Met)
The School presented a clear example of how changes to the national periodontal guidelines
had been incorporated into the programme. This change was disseminated out to staff and
students in all DECs and ETPs.
The panel was informed of a senior management restructure. This does not appear to be
causing issues, but the panel will monitor these changes and look forward to an update as to
how this is progressing.
The role of the DECs and ETPs is positive, however the programme team should ensure
external factors and pressures, such as funding and patient supply, do not have a detrimental
impact on the running of the programme and student experience.
In addition to the Annual Review Group, the Curriculum Development Group meets several
times a year to ensure the programme remains contemporaneous. The inspectors agreed this
is a positive approach and the GDC looks forward to receiving updates on its progress during
the Monitoring Process. The panel noted that the school had a risk register.
Requirement 10: Any concerns identified through the Quality Management framework,
including internal and external reports relating to quality, must be addressed as soon
as possible and the GDC notified of serious threats to students achieving the learning
outcomes. The provider will have systems in place to quality assure placements.
(Requirement Met)

Requirement 11: Programmes must be subject to rigorous internal and external quality
assurance procedures. External quality assurance should include the use of external
examiners, who should be familiar with the GDC learning outcomes and their context
and QAA guidelines should be followed where applicable. Patient and/or customer
feedback must be collected and used to inform programme development. (Requirement
Met)
The School has a good relationship with external examiners and a clear process for
responding to comments raised by them. The panel saw evidence of external examiners
providing feedback on the assessment process and how they can input feedback on the
Maxinity system, which is used to map GDC learning outcomes to assessments. The Maxinity
Software programme which is utilised in addition to deliver the quality assurance cycle of the
Schools summative assessment processes.
The panel saw an extensive collection of patient feedback and additional questions were
recently added to the feedback questionnaire asking about student preparedness. The School
is monitoring the use of the feedback forms. The panel obtained evidence from speaking to
students that the School reacts efficiently to feedback from the Staff Student Liaison
Committee.

Requirement 12: The provider must have effective systems in place to quality assure
placements where students deliver treatment to ensure that patient care and student
assessment across all locations meets these Standards. The quality assurance systems
should include the regular collection of student and patient feedback relating to
placements. (Requirement Met)
There is a Specification of Service agreement between UCLan and the DECs / ETPs. The
supervisors reported having a sufficient and comprehensive induction. The School undertakes
regular audit visits to the DECs and ETPs. The Clinical Education Co-ordinator undertakes
these visits with another Senior Clinical Teacher from a different DEC to ensure transparency
and consistency as well as calibrating between DECs
The panel was pleased to note the School’s support mechanism when it is identified students
require clinical remediation while they are within the ETP environment. In this situation,
additional training is provided within the DEC setting until an adequate level of clinical
competence has been achieved. Following completion of this, the student is able to return to
their designated ETP.
The School seeks feedback from students on the placements, which results in a process of
continual improvement alongside regular catch up meetings with placement providers
including Secondary Care. Any issues identified are shared with the School and brought to the
attention of the Clinical Education Co-ordinator immediately. The panel were particularly
impressed with the support and dedication from supervisors in the Carlisle training
environment which is isolated in terms of its location compared to other centres.

Standard 3 – Student assessment
Assessment must be reliable and valid. The choice of assessment method must be
appropriate to demonstrate achievement of the GDC learning outcomes. Assessors
must be fit to perform the assessment task.
Requirement 13: To award the qualification, providers must be assured that students
have demonstrated attainment across the full range of learning outcomes, and that they
are fit to practice at the level of a safe beginner. Evidence must be provided that
demonstrates this assurance, which should be supported by a coherent approach to the
principles of assessment referred to in these standards. (Requirement Met)
The inspectors noted there was a clear assessment strategy to ensure all the GDC Learning
Outcomes were appropriately covered. The Maxinity system is used to map the Learning
Outcomes to the BDS assessments and the inspectors were provided with access to review
the software.
In addition to Maxinity, the School uses the Leopard system to record student clinical activity
data. While the panel agreed that Leopard is a positive aspect of the programme and provides
the programme team with clear data on a student’s performance as well clinical activity, they
felt that the School could identify additional ways to use it during a student’s transition from the
DEC environment to the ETP.
The inspectors were informed that students are given their clinical targets early on in the
programme, which enables them to be proactive and plan their workload effectively. In the
event that a student is struggling to achieve experience in certain areas, the School has rapid
remediation systems in place to monitor students and provide additional support. The
inspectors were provided with minutes of the Clinical Assessment Panels (CAPs), which are
held to review student progress against the targets. The panel saw evidence of students who
had fallen below the required level of attainment and had supportive action plans put in place.
In this event, students were required to undertake additional clinical experience prior to being
allowed to progress further with the programme.
On completion of the BDS programme, all graduates are provided with a transcript of their
clinical experience to pass on to their foundation trainer. The panel agreed this was an area of
good practice as it enables trainers to focus their support on areas where the graduate felt less
confident.

Requirement 14: The provider must have in place management systems to plan, monitor
and centrally record the assessment of students, including the monitoring of clinical
and/or technical experience, throughout the programme against each of the learning
outcomes. (Requirement Met)
The panel was informed that academic assessments are recorded on the University Banner
system, while written assessments are undertaken on the Maxinity system. Both these
systems allow mapping against the Learning Outcomes. Maxinity also allows the School to
carry out quality assurance of assessments and analysis of assessment data.
All clinical experience data, including the grades awarded by supervisors, is uploaded by the
students onto the Leopard database. Inspectors were able to access Leopard to scrutinise the
data. Clinical experience is recorded in six domains: clinical skills, generic skills, knowledge,
management, communication and professionalism. Each domain has its own set of
descriptors, which are shared with students and staff. Currently the data is primarily recorded

on paper Clinical Feedback sheets and students then enter this information onto the Leopard
system. Students can access Leopard at any time but must input data relating to a particular
treatment within one week of the clinical activity having taken place. This Leopard data is
audited, regularly, by Senior Clinical Teachers at the DECs and used to monitor the student’s
activities and tailor their clinical requirements.
A Leopard Compliance Audit is carried out in October and March by a Senior Lecturer to
ensure that students are entering complete and accurate data from their Clinical Assessment
Sheets onto the Leopard system. If a student is deemed to be deficient in their record keeping,
a SERF record will be raised, which will lead to a learning action for the student. The
inspectors were informed that an electronic system to replace the paper-based recording is
currently being developed. The audit process will then be revised which would lead to
improved accuracy of data recording. The inspectors support this development and will be
reviewing progresses within the GDC’s Monitoring review.

Requirement 15: Students must have exposure to an appropriate breadth of
patients/procedures and should undertake each activity relating to patient care on
sufficient occasions to enable them to develop the skills and the level of competency to
achieve the relevant GDC learning outcomes. (Requirement Met)
The inspectors noted that students on the BDS programme have the opportunity to undertake
a wide range of clinical activity in DEC and ETP training settings, which are located within
areas of high deprivation and dental need. In the DECs and ETPs, students are able to treat
patients holistically, which the panel agreed gave the students valuable experience.
4th and 5th BDS attend additional clinical activity on their Secondary Care Placement.
The inspectors appreciated the different, but complementary experiences gained by the
students in the DEC and ETP settings respectively. ETPs enable students to practice
increasingly independently, whilst still under supervision, thus preparing them well for
independent practice as safe beginners.
The School uses a competency-based marking system to ensure students have sufficient
opportunity to gain experience to a competent level. Information gathered is reviewed at
Academic Advisor Meetings with Senior Clinical Teachers working within the DECs. If it is
identified that students require additional clinical experience, then suitable patients are
identified.

Requirement 16: Providers must demonstrate that assessments are fit for purpose and
deliver results which are valid and reliable. The methods of assessment used must be
appropriate to the learning outcomes, in line with current and best practice and be
routinely monitored, quality assured and developed. (Requirement Met)
The panel was informed that the School uses the Modified Angoff version of standard setting
for assessments, which is embedded within the Maxinity system. The inspectors were also
provided with evidence of the psychometric assessment that is carried out to inform the
examination process. The School maintains a question bank on Maxinity, which the inspectors
were provided access to, and which is updated annually.
The panel agreed that the range of assessments undertaken by students as part of the
programme were appropriate. The Curriculum Review Group also meets regularly to carry out
quality assurance on the range of assessments used.

The panel was provided with copies of the clinical grading descriptors used in the DEC and
ETP settings. The School hosts twice-yearly supervisor training days, which includes
calibration sessions on the use of the descriptors. In addition to this, the Clinical Supervisor
Handbook provides further guidance on the use of the marking system.
The panel noted an example of students raising a concern with the consistency of marking
during a phantom head session. This was raised with the programme team and additional
training delivered to the staff member in question.
The inspectors were informed that external examiners are appointed for all modules within the
programme. Each external examiner is provided with guidance and relevant module
information. In advance of a summative assessment, they are asked to comment on the
content, range and level of the assessment material. After the assessment, external examiners
are supplied with examination scripts or computer marked results for their scrutiny. They attend
module and programme board meetings to observe the conduct of these meetings. Examiners
are invited to comment on the examination, its conduct, marking and the performance of the
students. They are required to produce an annual evaluation report for the University.

Requirement 17: Assessment must utilise feedback collected from a variety of sources,
which should include other members of the dental team, peers, patients and/or
customers. (Requirement Partly Met)
During the inspection the panel was provided with evidence of patient feedback collected from
the various DEC and ETP training environments. In addition to this, the School is in the
process of developing a 360-degree feedback methodology. This new approach will more
effectively capture formal feedback from patients and members of the dental team, including
dental nurses and reception staff and is to be commended.
Currently, informal formative feedback is gathered from members of the dental team, which is
discussed with students by the Senior Clinical Teachers as part of their regular meetings. The
inspectors agreed that positive steps were being taken by the School to formalise this and the
GDC will be monitoring progress during the next Monitoring exercise.
Further to the 360-degree feedback trial, the inspectors agreed that the portfolios used to
monitor student progression provided a good opportunity for them to reflect on their
performance. Portfolios also allowed students to obtain contemporaneous feedback from their
supervisors in the DECs and ETPs.

Requirement 18: The provider must support students to improve their performance by
providing regular feedback and by encouraging students to reflect on their practice.
(Requirement Met)
Requirement 19: Examiners/assessors must have appropriate skills, experience and
training to undertake the task of assessment, including appropriate general or specialist
registration with a UK regulatory body. Examiners/ assessors should have received
training in equality and diversity relevant for their role. (Requirement Met)
Requirement 20: Providers must ask external examiners to report on the extent to which
assessment processes are rigorous, set at the correct standard, ensure equity of
treatment for students and have been fairly conducted. The responsibilities of the
external examiners must be clearly documented. (Requirement Met)

Requirement 21: Assessment must be fair and undertaken against clear criteria. The
standard expected of students in each area to be assessed must be clear and students
and staff involved in assessment must be aware of this standard. An appropriate
standard setting process must be employed for summative assessments. (Requirement
Met)

Summary of Action
Req.
number
13

Action

Observations & response from Provider

Due date

The School should consider identifying
additional ways to utilise Leopard data
during a student’s transition from the Dental
Education Centre to Enhanced Training
Practice environment.

There has been ongoing discussion between SCT and Annual Monitoring
ETP. The school will make sure that there will be a formal 2020
written transition going forward where it will indicate that
the student will require additional support or experience.
In the Final Year, students work in the enhanced training
practices but also continue to see patients at the DECs.
Currently, there are informal discussions between the
DEC senior clinical teachers and the ETP staff to share
information about students who will be coming to the
ETP. This includes the student’s clinical experience and
performance recorded via Leopard, but also any
additional observations regarding the student’s progress,
behaviour or professionalism so that ETP staff are
prepared to tailor the support, supervision and learning
opportunities to the needs of each student. We are now
introducing a more formal approach whereby the key
elements of the student’s leopard record of achievement
are documented together with any information gathered
from the DEC supervisors. This will be passed to the ETP
staff as a record of the student’s development to which
clinicians can refer in advance of working with the
student.

17

The School must continue to develop the
360-degree feedback system in order to
fully integrate it within the programme.

At submission and preparing the School for the GDC Annual Monitoring
inspection, the School had stated that the 360-degree 2020
feedback was a trial. Going forward, the School will
enhance this trial by having it formalised and renaming it
as Multi Source Feedback (MSF).

Observations from the provider on content of report
The School found the GDC inspection a very fair process. Although the inspection date was dictated by the GDC, the School received plenty
of notice to prepare for the inspection. The QA Manager was always quick to respond to any enquiries which made the whole process a lot
easier to understand and deliver to the GDC’s expectation. The GDC was accommodating and there was no adverse effect upon the teaching
and learning on the day or the patient experience.

Recommendations to the GDC
Education associates’ recommendation
Date of next regular monitoring exercise

Qualification continues to be approved for holders to apply for
registration as a dentist with the General Dental Council
2020

Annex 1

Inspection purpose and process

1. As part of its duty to protect patients and promote high standards within the professions it
regulates, the General Dental Council (GDC) quality assures the education and training of
student dentists and dental care professionals (DCPs) at institutions whose qualifications
enable the holder to apply for registration with the GDC. It also quality assures new
qualifications where it is intended that the qualification will lead to registration. The aim of
this quality assurance activity is to ensure that institutions produce a new registrant who has
demonstrated, on graduation, that they have met the learning outcomes required for
registration with the GDC. This ensures that students who obtain a qualification leading to
registration are fit to practice at the level of a safe beginner.
2. Inspections are a key element of the GDC’s quality assurance activity. They enable a
recommendation to be made to the Council of the GDC regarding the ‘sufficiency’ of the
programme for registration as a dentist and ‘approval’ of the programme for registration as a
dental care professional. The GDC’s powers are derived under Part II, Section 9 of the
Dentists Act 1984 (as amended).
3. The GDC document ‘Standards for Education’ 2nd edition 1 is the framework used to
evaluate qualifications. There are 21 Requirements in three distinct Standards, against
which each qualification is assessed.
4. The education provider is requested to undertake a self-evaluation of the programme
against the individual Requirements under the Standards for Education. This involves stating
whether each Requirement is ‘met’, ‘partly met’ or ‘not met’ and to provide evidence in
support of their evaluation. The inspection panel examines this evidence, may request
further documentary evidence and gathers further evidence from discussions with staff and
students. The panel will reach a decision on each Requirement, using the following
descriptors:
A Requirement is met if:
“There is sufficient appropriate evidence derived from the inspection process. This evidence
provides the inspectors with broad confidence that the provider demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students is supportive of
documentary evidence and the evidence is robust, consistent and not contradictory. There
may be minor deficiencies in the evidence supplied but these are likely to be
inconsequential.”
A Requirement is partly met if:
“Evidence derived from the inspection process is either incomplete or lacks detail and, as
such, fails to convince the inspection panel that the provider fully demonstrates the
Requirement. Information gathered through meetings with staff and students may not fully
support the evidence submitted or there may be contradictory information in the evidence
provided. There is, however, some evidence of compliance and it is likely that either (a) the
appropriate evidence can be supplied in a short time frame, or, (b) any deficiencies identified
can be addressed and evidenced in the annual monitoring process.”
A Requirement is not met if:

“The provider cannot provide evidence to demonstrate a Requirement or the evidence
provided is not convincing. The information gathered at the inspection through meetings with
staff and students does not support the evidence provided or the evidence is inconsistent
and/or incompatible with other findings. The deficiencies identified are such as to give rise to
serious concern and will require an immediate action plan from the provider. The
consequences of not meeting a Requirement in terms of the overall sufficiency of a
programme will depend upon the compliance of the provider across the range of
Requirements and the possible implications for public protection”
5. Inspection reports highlight areas of strength and draw attention to areas requiring
improvement and development, including actions that are required to be undertaken by the
provider. Where an action is needed for a Requirement to be met, the term ‘must’ is used to
describe the obligation on the provider to undertake this action. For these actions the
inspectors may stipulate a specific timescale by which the action must be completed or when
an update on progress must be provided. In their observations on the content of the report,
the provider should confirm the anticipated date by which these actions will be completed.
Where an action would improve how a Requirement is met, the term ‘should’ is used and for
these actions there will be no due date stipulated. Providers will be asked to report on the
progress in addressing the required actions through the annual monitoring process. Serious
concerns about a lack of progress may result in further inspections or other quality
assurance activity.
6. The QA team aims to send an initial draft of the inspection report to the provider within two
months of the conclusion of the inspection. The provider of the qualification has the
opportunity to provide factual corrections on the draft report. Following the production of the
final report the provider is asked to submit observations on, or objections to, the report and
the actions listed. Where the inspection panel have recommended that the programme is
sufficient for registration, the Council of the GDC have delegated responsibility to the GDC
Registrar to consider the recommendations of the panel. Should an inspection panel not be
able to recommend ‘sufficiency’ or ‘approval’, the report and observations would be
presented to the Council of the GDC for consideration.
7. The final version of the report and the provider’s observations are published on the GDC
website.

